<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Egypt of the Hebrews and Herodotos</title>
      <author><name reg="Sayce, A. H.">A. H. Sayce</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>February 12, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">38843</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="ar"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-02-12">February 12, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Delphine Lettau, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Egypt of the Hebrews and Herodotos</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">The Rev. A. H. Sayce</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Assyriology at Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Rivington, Percical &amp; Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1895</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
A few words of preface are needful to justify
the addition of another contribution to the
over-abundant mass of literature of which
Egypt is the subject. It is intended to supplement
the books already in the hands of tourists
and students, and to put before them just
that information which either is not readily
accessible or else forms part of larger and
cumbrous works. The travels of Herodotos
in Egypt are followed for the first time in the
light of recent discoveries, and the history of
the intercourse between the Egyptians and the
Jews is brought down to the age of the Roman
Empire. As the ordinary histories of Egypt
used by travellers end with the extinction of
the native Pharaohs, I have further given a
sketch of the Ptolemaic period. I have moreover
specially noted the results of the recent
excavations and discoveries made by the Egypt
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
Exploration Fund and by Professor Flinders
Petrie, at all events where they bear upon the
subject-matter of the book. Those who have
not the publications of the Fund or of Professor
Petrie, or who do not care to carry them
into Egypt, will, I believe, be glad to have the
essence of them thus extracted in a convenient
shape. Lastly, in the Appendices I have put
together information which the visitor to the
Nile often wishes to obtain, but which he can
find in none of his guide-books. The Appendix
on the nomes embodies the results of
the latest researches, and the list will therefore
be found to differ here and there from the
lists which have been published elsewhere.
Those who desire the assistance of maps
should procure the very handy and complete
<hi rend='italic'>Atlas of Ancient Egypt</hi>, published by the
Egypt Exploration Fund (price 3s. 6d.). It
makes the addition of maps to this or any
future work on Ancient Egypt superfluous.
</p>

<p>
Discoveries follow so thickly one upon the
other in these days of active exploration that
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
it is impossible for an author to keep pace
with them. Since my manuscript was ready for
the press Dr. Naville, on behalf of the Egypt
Exploration Fund, has practically cleared the
magnificent temple of Queen Hatshepsu at Dêr
el-Bâhari, and has discovered beneath it the
unfinished sepulchre in which the queen fondly
hoped that her body would be laid; Professor
Petrie has excavated in the desert behind
Zawêdeh and opposite Qoft the tombs of
barbarous tribes, probably of Libyan origin,
who settled in the valley of the Nile between
the fall of the sixth and the rise of the
eleventh dynasty; Mr. de Morgan has disinterred
more jewellery of exquisite workmanship
from the tombs of the princesses of the
twelfth dynasty at Dahshûr; and Dr. Botti
has discovered the site of the Serapeum at
Alexandria, thus obtaining for the first time a
point of importance for determining the topography
of the ancient city.
</p>

<p>
The people whose remains have been found
by Professor Petrie buried their dead in open
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
situated in the central court. But his most
interesting discovery is that of long subterranean
passages, once faced with masonry, and
furnished with niches for lamps, where the
mysteries of Serapis were celebrated. At
the entrance of one of them pious visitors to
the shrine have scratched their vows on the
wall of rock. Those who are interested in the
discovery should consult Dr. Botti's memoir on
<hi rend='italic'>L'Acropole d'Alexandrie et le Sérapeum</hi>, presented
to the Archæological Society of Alexandria,
17th August 1895.
</p>

<p>
Two or three other recent discoveries may
also find mention here. A Babylonian seal-cylinder
now in the Metropolitan Museum of
Art at New York has at last given me a clue to
the native home of the Hyksos leaders. This
was in the mountains of Elam, on the eastern
frontier of Chaldæa. It was from these mountains
that the Kassi descended upon Babylonia
and founded a dynasty there which lasted for
nearly 600 years, and the same movement
which brought them into Babylonia may have
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
sent other bands of them across Western Asia
into Egypt. At all events, the inscription upon
the seal shows that it belonged to a certain
Uzi-Sutakh, <q>the son of the Kassite,</q> and <q>the
servant of Burna-buryas,</q> who was the Kassite
king of Babylonia in the age of the Tel el-Amarna
correspondence. As the name of
Sutakh is preceded by the determinative of
divinity, it is clear that we have in it the name
of the Hyksos deity Sutekh.
</p>

<p>
In a hieroglyphic stela lately discovered at
Saqqârah, and now in the Gizeh Museum, we
read of an earlier parallel to the Tyrian Camp
at Memphis seen by Herodotos. We learn
from the stela that, in the time of King Ai, in
the closing days of the eighteenth dynasty,
there was already a similar <q>Camp</q> or quarter
at Memphis which was assigned to the Hittites.
The inscription is further interesting as showing
that the authority of Ai was acknowledged
at Memphis, the capital of Northern Egypt, as
well as in the Thebaid.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, Professor Hommel seems to have
<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>
found the name of the Zakkur or Zakkal, the
kinsfolk and associates of the Philistines, in a
broken cuneiform text which relates to one of
the Kassite kings of Babylonia not long before
the epoch of Khu-n-Aten. Here mention is
made not only of the city of Arka in Phœnicia,
but also of the city of Zaqqalû. In Zaqqalû
we must recognise the Zakkur of Egyptian
history. I may add that Khar or Khal, the
name given by the Egyptians to the southern
portion of Palestine, is identified by Professor
Maspero with the Horites of the Old Testament.
</p>

<p>
By way of conclusion, I have only to say
that those who wish to read a detailed account
of the manner in which the great colossus of
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> at Memphis was raised and its
companion statue disinterred must refer to the
Paper published by Major Arthur H. Bagnold
himself in the <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings</hi> of the Society of
Biblical Archæology for June 1888.
</p>

<p>
A. H. Sayce.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>October 1895.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Patriarchal Age.</head>

<p>
<q>Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there.</q>
When he entered the country the civilisation and
monarchy of Egypt were already very old. The
pyramids had been built hundreds of years before,
and the origin of the Sphinx was already a mystery.
Even the great obelisk of Heliopolis, which is still
the object of an afternoon drive to the tourist at
Cairo, had long been standing in front of the temple
of the Sun-god.
</p>

<p>
The monuments of Babylonia enable us to fix
the age to which Abraham belongs. Arioch of
Ellasar has left memorials of himself on the bricks
of Chaldæa, and we now know when he and his
Elamite allies were driven out of Babylonia and the
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
Babylonian states were united into a single monarchy.
This was 2350 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The united monarchy of Egypt went back to a
far earlier date. Menes, its founder, had been king
of This (or Girgeh) in Upper Egypt, and starting
from his ancestral dominions had succeeded in bringing
all Egypt under his rule. But the memory of an
earlier time, when the valley of the Nile was divided
into two separate sovereignties, survived to the latest
age of the monarchy. Up to the last the Pharaohs
of Egypt called themselves <q>kings of the two lands,</q>
and wore on their heads the crowns of Upper and
Lower Egypt. The crown of Upper Egypt was a
tiara of white linen, that of Lower Egypt a throne-like
head-dress of red. The double crown was a
symbol of the imperial power.
</p>

<p>
To Menes is ascribed the building of Memphis,
the capital of the united kingdom. He is said to
have raised the great dyke which Linant de Bellefonds
identifies with that of Kosheish near Kafr el-Ayyât,
and thereby to have diverted the Nile from its
ancient channel under the Libyan plain. On the
ground that he thus added to the western bank of
the river his new capital was erected.
</p>

<p>
Memphis is the Greek form of the old Egyptian
Men-nefer or <q>Good Place.</q> The final <hi rend='italic'>r</hi> was dropped
in Egyptian pronunciation at an early date, and
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
thus arose the Hebrew forms of the name, Moph and
Noph, which we find in the Old Testament,<note place='foot'>Hosea ix. 6; Isaiah xix. 13; Jeremiah ii. 16.</note> while
<q>Memphis</q> itself&mdash;Mimpi in the cuneiform inscriptions
of Assyria&mdash;has the same origin. Another name by
which it went in old Egyptian times was Anbu-hez,
<q>the white wall,</q> from the great wall of brick, covered
with white stucco, which surrounded it, and of which
traces still remain on the northern side of the old
site. Here a fragment of the ancient fortification
still rises above the mounds of the city; the wall is
many feet thick, and the sun-dried bricks of which it
is formed are bonded together with the stems of
palms.
</p>

<p>
In the midst of the mounds is a large and deep
depression, which is filled with water during the
greater part of the year. It marks the site of the
sacred lake, which was attached to every Egyptian
temple, and in which the priests bathed themselves
and washed the vessels of the sanctuary. Here, not
long ago, lay the huge colossus of limestone which
represented Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> of the nineteenth dynasty, and
had been presented by the Egyptian Khedive to the
British Government. But it was too heavy and
unwieldy for modern engineers to carry across the
sea, and it was therefore left lying with its face prone
in the mud and water of the ancient lake, a prey to
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
the first comer who needed a quarry of stone. It
was not until after the English occupation of Egypt
that it was lifted out of its ignoble position by Major
Bagnold and placed securely in a wooden shed.
While it was being raised another colossus of the
same Pharaoh, of smaller size but of better workmanship,
was discovered, and lifted beyond the reach
of the inundation.
</p>

<p>
The two statues once stood before the temple of
the god Ptah, whom the Greeks identified with their
own deity Hephæstos, for no better reason than the
similarity of name. The temple of Ptah was coeval
with the city of Memphis itself. When Menes
founded Memphis, he founded the temple at the same
time. It was the centre and glory of the city, which
was placed under the protection of its god. Pharaoh
after Pharaoh adorned and enlarged it, and its priests
formed one of the most powerful organisations in the
kingdom.
</p>

<p>
The temple of Ptah, the Creator, gave to Memphis
its sacred name. This was Hâ-ka-Ptah, <q>the house
of the double (or spiritual appearance) of Ptah,</q> in
which Dr. Brugsch sees the original of the Greek
Aigyptos.
</p>

<p>
But the glories of the temple of Ptah have long
since passed away. The worship of its god ceased
for ever when Theodosius, the Roman Emperor,
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
closed its gates, and forbade any other religion save
the Christian to be henceforth publicly professed in
the empire. Soon afterwards came the Mohammedan
conquest of Egypt. Memphis was deserted; and the
sculptured stones of the ancient shrine served to build
the palaces and mosques of the new lords of the
country. Fostât and Cairo were built out of the
spoils of the temple of Ptah. But the work of destruction
took long to accomplish. As late as the
twelfth century, the Arabic writer 'Abd el-Latîf
describes the marvellous relics of the past which still
existed on the site of Memphis. Colossal statues,
the bases of gigantic columns, a chapel formed of a
single block of stone and called <q>the green chamber</q>&mdash;such
were some of the wonders of ancient art which
the traveller was forced to admire.
</p>

<p>
The history of Egypt, as we have seen, begins
with the record of an engineering feat of the highest
magnitude. It is a fitting commencement for the
history of a country which has been wrested by man
from the waters of the Nile, and whose existence even
now is dependent on the successful efforts of the
engineer. Beyond this single record, the history of
Menes and his immediate successors is virtually a
blank. No dated monuments of the first dynasty
have as yet been discovered. It may be, as many
Egyptologists think, that the Sphinx is older than
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
Menes himself; but if so, that strange image, carved
out of a rock which may once have jutted into the
stream of the Nile, still keeps the mystery of its origin
locked up in its breast. We know that it was already
there in the days of Khephrên of the fourth dynasty;
but beyond that we know nothing.
</p>

<p>
Of the second dynasty a dated record still survives.
Almost the first gift received by the Ashmolean
Museum at Oxford was the lintel-stone of an
ancient Egyptian tomb, brought from Saqqârah, the
necropolis of Memphis, by Dr. Greaves at the end of
the seventeenth century. When, more than a century
later, the hieroglyphics upon it came to be read, it
was found that it had belonged to the sepulchre of a
certain Sheri who had been the <q>prophet</q> of the two
Pharaohs Send and Per-ab-sen. Of Per-ab-sen no
other record remains, but the name of Send had
long been known as that of a king of the second
dynasty.
</p>

<p>
The rest of Sheri's tomb, so far as it has been
preserved, is now in the Gizeh Museum. Years after
the inscription on the fragment at Oxford had been
deciphered, the hinder portion of the tomb was discovered
by Mariette. Like the lintel-stone in the
Ashmolean Museum, it is adorned with sculptures
and hieroglyphics. Already, we learn from it, the
hieroglyphic system of writing was complete, the
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
characters being used not only to denote ideas and
express syllables, but alphabetically as well. The
name of Send himself is spelt in the letters of the
alphabet. The art of the monument, though not equal
to that which prevailed a few generations later, is
already advanced, while the texts show that the
religion and organisation of the empire were already
old. In the age of the second dynasty, at all events,
we are far removed from the beginnings of Egyptian
civilisation.
</p>

<p>
With Snefru, the first king of the fourth dynasty,
or, according to another reckoning, the last king of
the third, we enter upon the monumental history of
Egypt. Snefru's monuments are to be found, not
only in Egypt, but also in the deserts of Sinai.
There the mines of copper and malachite were
worked for him, and an Egyptian garrison kept guard
upon the Bedouin tribes. In Egypt, as has now been
definitely proved by Professor Petrie's excavations,
he built the pyramid of Medûm, one of the largest
and most striking of the pyramids. Around it were
ranged the tombs of his nobles and priests, from
which have come some of the most beautiful works
of art in the Gizeh Museum.
</p>

<p>
The painted limestone statues of Ra-nefer and his
wife Nefert, for instance, are among the finest
existing specimens of ancient Egyptian workmanship.
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
They are clearly life-like portraits, executed
with a delicacy and finish which might well excite
the envy of a modern artist. The character, and even
the antecedents of the husband and wife, breathe
through their features. While in the one we can see
the strong will and solid common-sense of the self-made
man, in the other can be traced the culture
and refinement of a royal princess.
</p>

<p>
The pyramids of Gizeh are the imperishable
record of the fourth dynasty. Khufu, Khaf-Ra
and Men-ka-Ra, the Kheops, Khephrên and Mykerinos
of Herodotos, were the builders of the three
vast sepulchres which, by their size and nearness to
Cairo, have so long been an object of pilgrimage to
the traveller. The huge granite blocks of the Great
Pyramid of Khufu have been cut and fitted together
with a marvellous exactitude. Professor Petrie found
that the joints of the casing-stones, with an area of
some thirty-five square feet each, were not only
worked with an accuracy equal to that of the
modern optician, but were even cemented throughout.
<q>Though the stones were brought as close
as 1/500 inch, or, in fact, into contact, and the mean
opening of the joint was 1/50 inch, yet the builders
managed to fill the joint with cement, despite the
great area of it and the weight of the stone to be
moved&mdash;some sixteen tons. To merely place such
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
stones in exact contact at the sides would be careful
work; but to do so with cement in the joints seems
almost impossible.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh</hi> (first edition), p. 44.</note>
</p>

<p>
Professor Petrie believes that the stones were cut
with tubular drills fitted with jewel points&mdash;a mode
of cutting stone which it was left to the nineteenth
century to re-discover. The lines marked upon the
stone by the drills can still be observed, and there is
evidence that not only the tool but the stone also
was rotated. The great pressure needed for driving
the drills and saws with the requisite rapidity through
the blocks of granite and diorite is indeed surprising.
It brings before us the high mechanical knowledge
attained by the Egyptians in the fourth millennium
before our era even more forcibly than the heights to
which the blocks were raised. The machinery, however,
with which this latter work was effected is still
unknown.
</p>

<p>
The sculptured and painted walls of the tombs
which surround the pyramids of Gizeh tell us something
about the life and civilisation of the period.
The government was a highly organised bureaucracy,
under a king who was already regarded as the representative
of the Sun-god upon earth. The land
was inhabited by an industrious people, mainly
agricultural, who lived in peace and plenty. Arts
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
and crafts of all kinds were cultivated, including that
of making glass. The art of the sculptor had reached
a high perfection. One of the most striking statues
in the world is that of Khaf-Ra seated on his imperial
throne, which is now in the Museum of Gizeh. The
figure of the king is more than life-size; above his
head the imperial hawk stretches forth its wings, and
on the king's face, though the features bear the
unmistakable impress of a portrait, there rests an
aspect of divine calm. And yet this statue, with its
living portraiture and exquisite finish, is carved out
of a dioritic rock, the hardest of hard stone.
</p>

<p>
The fourth dynasty was peaceably succeeded by
the fifth and the sixth. Culture and cultivation made
yet further progress, and the art of the painter and
sculptor reached its climax. Those whose knowledge
of Egyptian art is derived from the museums of
Europe have little idea of the perfection which it
attained at this remote period. The hard and crystallised
art of later ages differed essentially from that
of the early dynasties. The wooden figure of
the 'Sheikh el-Beled'&mdash;the sleek and well-to-do
farmer, who gazes complacently on his fertile fields
and well-stocked farm&mdash;is one of the noblest works
of human genius. And yet it belongs to the age of
the fifth or the sixth dynasty, like the pictures in
low relief, resembling exquisite embroidery on stone,
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
which cover the walls of the tombs of Ti and Ptah-hotep
at Saqqârah.
</p>

<p>
The first six dynasties constitute what Egyptologists
call the Old Empire. They ended with a
queen, Nit-aqer (the Greek Nitôkris), and Egypt
passed under sudden eclipse. For several centuries it
lies concealed from the eye of history. A few royal
names alone are preserved; other records there are as
yet none. What befell the country and its rulers we
do not know. Whether it was foreign invasion or civil
war, or the internal decay of the government, certain
it is that disaster overshadowed for a while the valley
of the Nile. It may be that the barbarian tribes,
whose tombs Professor Petrie has lately discovered
in the desert opposite Qoft, and whom he believes to
have been of Libyan origin, were the cause. With
the tenth dynasty light begins again to dawn. Mr.
Griffith has shown that some at least of the tombs
cut out of the cliffs behind Siût belonged to that era,
and that Ka-meri-Ra, whose name appears in one of
them, was a king of the tenth dynasty. The fragmentary
inscription, which can still be traced on the
walls of the tomb, seems to allude to the successful
suppression of a civil war.
</p>

<p>
The eleventh dynasty arose at Thebes, of which its
founders were the hereditary chiefs. It introduces
us to the so-called Middle Empire. But the Egypt
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
of the Middle Empire was no longer the Egypt of
the Old Empire. The age of the great pyramid-builders
was past, and the tomb carved in the rock
begins to take the place of the pyramid of the earlier
age. Memphis has ceased to be the capital of the
country; the centre of power has been transferred to
Thebes and the south. The art which flourished at
Memphis has been superseded by the art with which
our museums have made us familiar. With the
transfer of the government, moreover, from north to
south, Egyptian religion has undergone a change.
Ptah of Memphis and Ra of Heliopolis have had to
yield to Amon, the god of Thebes. The god of the
house of the new Pharaohs now takes his place at the
head of the pantheon, and the older gods of the north
fall more and more into the background.
</p>

<p>
The Egypt of the Middle Empire was divided
among a number of great princes, who had received
their power and property by inheritance, and resembled
the great lords of the feudal age. The
Pharaoh at first was little more than the chief among
his peers. But when the sceptre passed into the
vigorous hands of the kings of the twelfth dynasty,
the influence and authority of the feudal princes was
more and more encroached upon. A firm government
at home and successful campaigns abroad restored
the supreme rule of the Pharaoh and made
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
him, perhaps more than had ever been the case before,
a divinely-instituted autocrat.
</p>

<p>
The wars of the twelfth dynasty extended the
Egyptian domination far to the south. The military
organisation of the Middle Empire was indeed its
most striking point of contrast to the Old Empire.
The Egypt of the first six dynasties had been self-contained
and pacific. A few raids were made from
time to time against the negroes south of the First
Cataract, but only for the sake of obtaining slaves.
The idea of extending Egyptian power beyond the
natural boundaries of Egypt has as yet never presented
itself. The Pharaohs of the Old Empire did
not need an army, and accordingly did not possess
one. But with the Middle Empire all this was
changed. Egypt ceases to be isolated: its history
will be henceforth part of the history of the world.
Foreign wars, however, and the organisation of a
strong government at home, did not absorb the whole
energies of the court. Temples and obelisks were
erected, art was patronised, and the creation of the
Fayyûm, whereby a large tract of fertile land was
won for Egypt, not only proved the high engineering
skill of the age of the twelfth dynasty, but constituted
a solid claim for gratitude to its creator, Amon-em-hat
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, on the part of all succeeding generations.
</p>

<p>
The thirteenth dynasty followed in the footsteps of
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
its predecessor. We possess the names of more than
one hundred and fifty kings who belonged to it, and
their monuments were scattered from one end of
Egypt to the other. The fourteenth dynasty ended
in disaster. Egypt was invaded by Asiatic hordes,
and the line of native Pharaohs was for a time extinct.
</p>

<p>
The invaders were called by Manetho, the
Egyptian historian, the Hyksos or Shepherd Princes:
on the monuments they are known as the Aamu or
<q>Asiatics.</q> At first, we are told, their progress was
marked by massacre and destruction. The temples
were profaned and overthrown, the cities burned with
fire. But after a while the higher culture of the conquered
people overcame the conquerors. A king
arose among the invaders who soon adopted the
prerogatives and state of the Pharaohs. The fifteenth,
sixteenth, and seventeenth dynasties were Hyksos.
</p>

<p>
Recent discoveries have proved that at one time
the dominion of the Hyksos extended, if not to the
first cataract, at all events far to the south of Thebes.
Their monuments have been found at Gebelên and
El-Kab. Gradually, however, the native princes
recovered their power in Upper Egypt. While the
seventeenth Hyksos dynasty was reigning at Zoan,
or Tanis, in the north, a seventeenth Egyptian
dynasty was ruling at Thebes. But the princes of
Thebes did not as yet venture to claim the imperial
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
title. They still acknowledged the supremacy of the
foreign Pharaoh.
</p>

<p>
The war of independence broke out in the reign
of the Hyksos king Apopi. According to the
Egyptian legend, Apopi had sent messengers to the
prince of Thebes, bidding him worship none other
god than Baal-Sutekh, the Hyksos divinity. But
Amon-Ra of Thebes avenged the dishonour that
had been done him, and stirred up his adorers to
successful revolt. For five generations the war went
on, and ended with the complete expulsion of the
stranger. Southern Egypt first recovered its independence,
then Memphis fell, and finally the
Hyksos conquerors were driven out of Zoan, their
capital, and confined to the fortress of Avaris, on
the confines of Asia. But even here they were not
safe from the avenging hand of the Egyptian.
Ahmes I., the founder of the eighteenth dynasty,
drove them from their last refuge and pursued them
into Palestine.
</p>

<p>
The land which had sent forth its hordes to conquer
Egypt was now in turn to be conquered by
the Egyptians. The war was carried into Asia, and
the struggle for independence became a struggle for
empire. Under the Pharaohs of the eighteenth
dynasty, Egypt, for the first time in its history,
became a great military state. Army after army
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
poured out of the gates of Thebes, and brought
back to it the spoils of the known world. Ethiopia
and Syria alike felt the tread of the Egyptian armies,
and had alike to bow the neck to Egyptian rule.
Canaan became an Egyptian province, Egyptian
garrisons were established in the far north on the
frontiers of the Hittite tribes, and the boundaries
of the Pharaoh's empire were pushed to the banks
of the Euphrates.
</p>

<p>
It is probable that Abraham did not enter Egypt
until after the Hyksos conquest. But before the
rise of the eighteenth dynasty Egyptian chronology
is uncertain. We have to reckon it by dynasties
rather than by years. According to Manetho, the
Old Empire lasted 1478 years, and a considerable
interval must be allowed for the troublous times
which intervened between its fall and the beginning
of the Middle Empire. We learn from the Turin
papyrus&mdash;a list of the Egyptian kings and dynasties
compiled in the time of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, but now, alas!
in tattered fragments&mdash;that the tenth dynasty lasted
355 years and 10 days, the eleventh dynasty 243
years. The duration of the twelfth dynasty is known
from the monuments (165 years 2 months), that of
the thirteenth, with its more than one hundred and
fifty kings, cannot have been short. How long the
Hyksos rule endured it is difficult to say. Africanus,
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
quoting from Manetho, as Professor Erman has
shown, makes it 953 years, with which the fragment
quoted by Josephus from the Egyptian historian also
agrees. In this case the Hyksos conquest of Egypt
would have taken place about 2550 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Unfortunately the original work of Manetho is
lost, and we are dependent for our knowledge of it
on later writers, most of whom sought to harmonise
its chronology with that of the Septuagint. When
we further remember the corruptions undergone by
numerical figures in passing through the hands of
the copyists, it is clear that we cannot place implicit
confidence in the Manethonian numbers as they have
come down to us. Indeed, the writers who have
recorded them do not always agree together, and
we find the names of kings arbitrarily omitted or
the length of their reigns shortened in order to force
the chronology into agreement with that of the
author. The twelfth dynasty reigned 134 years
according to Eusebius, 160 years according to
Africanus; its real duration was 165 years, 2 months,
and 12 days.
</p>

<p>
With the help of certain astronomical data furnished
by the monuments, Dr. Mahler, the Viennese
astronomer, has succeeded in determining the exact
date of the reigns of the two most famous monarchs
of the eighteenth and nineteenth dynasties,
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> and Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> reigned
from the 20th of March <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1503 to the 14th of
February <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1449, while the reign of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>
lasted from <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1348 to <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1281. The date of
Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> enables us to fix the beginning of
the eighteenth dynasty about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1570.
</p>

<p>
The dynasties of Manetho were successive and
not contemporaneous. This fact was one of the main
results of the excavations and discoveries of Mariette
Pasha. The old attempts to form artificial schemes
of chronology&mdash;which, however, satisfied no one but
their authors&mdash;upon the supposition that some of the
dynasties reigned together are now discredited for
ever. Every fresh discovery made in Egypt, which
adds to our knowledge of ancient Egyptian history,
makes the fact still more certain. There were epochs,
indeed, when more than one line of kings claimed
sway in the valley of the Nile, but when such was
the case, Manetho selected what he or his authorities
considered the sole legitimate dynasty, and disregarded
every other. Of the two rival twenty-first dynasties
which the monuments have brought to light, the lists
of Manetho recognise but one, and the Assyrian rule
in Egypt at a subsequent date is ignored in favour of
the princes of Sais who were reigning at the same
time.
</p>

<p>
If, then, any reliance is to be placed on the length
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
of time ascribed to the Hyksos dominion in the
valley of the Nile, and if we are still to hold to the
old belief of Christendom and see in the Hebrew
wanderer into Egypt the Abram who contended
against Chedor-laomer and the subject kings of
Babylonia, it would have been about two centuries
after the settlement of the Asiatic conquerors in the
Delta that Abraham and Sarah arrived at their court.
The court was doubtless held at Zoan, the modern
Sân. Here was the Hyksos capital, and its proximity
to the Asiatic frontier of Egypt made it easy of
access to a traveller from Palestine. We are told
in the Book of Numbers (xiii. 22) that Hebron was
built seven years before Zoan in Egypt; and it may
be that the building here referred to was that which
caused Zoan to become the seat of the Hyksos power.
</p>

<p>
Asiatic migration into Egypt was no new thing.
On the walls of one of the tombs of Beni-Hassan
there is pictured the arrival of thirty-seven Aamu or
Asiatics <q>of Shu,</q> in the sixth year of Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>
of the twelfth dynasty. Under the conduct of their
chief, Ab-sha, they came from the mountains of the
desert, bringing with them gazelles as well as kohl
for the ladies of the court. Four women in long
bright-coloured robes walk between groups of bearded
men, and two children are carried in a pannier on
a donkey's back. The men are armed with bows,
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
their feet are shod with sandals, and they wear the
vari-coloured garments for which the people of
Phœnicia were afterwards famed.
</p>

<p>
After the Hyksos conquest Asiatic migration
must naturally have largely increased. Between
northern Egypt and Palestine there must have been
a constant passage to and fro. The rulers of the
land of the Nile were now themselves of Asiatic
extraction, and it may be that the language of
Palestine was spoken in the court of the Pharaoh.
At all events, the emigrant from Canaan no longer
found himself an alien and a stranger in <q>the land
of Ham.</q> His own kin were now supreme there,
and a welcome was assured to him whenever he
might choose to come. The subject population tilled
their fields for the benefit of their foreign lords, and
the benefit was shared by the inhabitants of Canaan.
In case of famine, Palestine could now look to the
never-failing soil of Egypt for its supply of corn.
</p>

<p>
If, therefore, Abraham lived in the age when
northern Egypt was subject to the rule of the Hyksos
Pharaohs, nothing was more natural than for him,
an Asiatic emigrant into Canaan, to wander into
Egypt when the corn of Palestine had failed. He
would but be following in the wake of that larger
Asiatic migration which led to the rise of the Hyksos
dynasties themselves.
</p>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<p>
There is, however, a statement connected with
his residence at the court of the Pharaoh which
does not seem compatible with the evidence of the
monuments. We are told that among the gifts
showered upon him by the king were not only sheep
and oxen and asses, but camels as well. The camel
was the constant companion of the Asiatic nomad.
As far back as we can trace the history of the
Bedouin, he has been accompanied by the animal
which the old Sumerian population of Babylonia
called the beast which came from the Persian Gulf.
Indeed, it would appear that to the Bedouin belongs
the credit of taming the camel, in so far as it has
been tamed at all. But to the Egyptians it was
practically unknown. Neither in the hieroglyphics,
nor on the sculptured and painted walls of the
temples and tombs, do we anywhere find it represented.
The earliest mention of it yet met with
in an Egyptian document is in a papyrus of the age
of the Exodus, and there it bears the Semitic name of
<foreign rend='italic'>kamail</foreign>, the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>gamal</foreign>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pap. Anastasi</hi>, i. p. 23, line 5.</note> Naturalists have shown
that it was not introduced into the northern coast of
Africa until after the beginning of the Christian era.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless it does not follow that because the
camel was never used in Egypt by the natives of
the country, it was not at times brought there by
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
nomad visitors from Arabia and Palestine. It is
difficult to conceive of an Arab family on the march
without a train of camels. And that camels actually
found their way into the valley of the Nile has been
proved by excavation. When Hekekyan Bey, in
1851-54, was sinking shafts in the Nile mud at
Memphis for the Geological Society of London, he
found, among other animal remains, the bones of
dromedaries.<note place='foot'>Horner, in the <hi rend='italic'>Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society</hi>,
1855-58.</note>
</p>

<p>
The name of the Pharaoh visited by Abraham
is not told to us. As elsewhere in Genesis, the king
of Egypt is referred to only by his official title.
This title of <q>Pharaoh</q> was one which went back
to the early days of the monarchy. It represents
the Egyptian Per-âa, or <q>Great House,</q> and is of
repeated occurrence in the inscriptions. All power
and government emanated from the royal palace,
and accordingly, just as we speak of the <q>Sublime
Porte</q> or <q>Lofty Gate</q> when we mean the Sultan
of Turkey, so the Egyptians spoke of their own
sovereign as the Pharaoh or <q>Great House.</q> To
this day the king of Japan is called the Mi-kado,
or <q>Lofty Gate.</q>
</p>

<p>
That the Hyksos princes should have assumed
the title of their predecessors on the throne of Egypt
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
is not surprising. The monuments have shown us
how thoroughly Egyptianised they soon became.
The court of the Hyksos Pharaoh differed but little,
if at all, from that of the native Pharaoh. The
invaders rapidly adopted the culture of the conquered
people, and with it their manners, customs,
and even language. The most famous mathematical
treatise which Egypt has bequeathed to us was
written for a Hyksos king. It may be that the
old language of Asia was retained, at all events for
a time, by the side of the language of the subject
population; but if so, its position must have been
like that of Turkish by the side of Arabic in Egypt
during the reign of Mohammed Ali. For several
centuries the Hyksos could be described as Egyptians,
and the dynasties of the Hyksos Pharaohs are counted
by the Egyptian historian among the legitimate
dynasties of his country.
</p>

<p>
It was only in the matter of religion that the
Hyksos court kept itself distinct from its native
subjects. The supreme god of the Hyksos princes
was Sutekh, in whom we must see a form of the
Semitic Baal. As has already been stated, Egyptian
legend ascribed the origin of the war of independence
to a demand on the part of the Hyksos
Pharaoh Apopi that the prince and the god of
Thebes should acknowledge the supremacy of the
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
Hyksos deity. But even in the matter of religion
the Hyksos princes could not help submitting to
the influence of the old Egyptian civilisation. Ra,
the sun-god of Heliopolis, was identified with Sutekh,
and even Apopi added to his name the title of Ra,
and so claimed to be an incarnation of the Egyptian
sun-god, like the native Pharaohs who had gone
before him.
</p>

<p>
When next we hear of Egypt in the Old Testament,
it is when Israel is about to become a nation.
Joseph was sold by his brethren to merchants from
Arabia, who carried him into Egypt. There he
became the slave of Potiphar, <q>the eunuch of Pharaoh
and chief of the executioners,</q> or royal body-guard.
The name of Potiphar, like that of Potipherah, the
priest of On, corresponds with the Egyptian Pa-tu-pa-Ra,
<q>the Gift of the Sun-god.</q> It has been asserted
by Egyptologists that names of this description are
not older than the age of the twenty-second dynasty,
to which Shishak, the contemporary of Rehoboam,
belonged; but because no similar name of an earlier
date has hitherto been found, it does not follow that
such do not exist. As long as our materials are
imperfect, we cannot draw positive conclusions merely
from an absence of evidence.
</p>

<p>
That Potiphar should have been an eunuch and
yet been married seems a greater obstacle to our
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
acceptance of the story. This, however, it need not
be. Eunuchs in the modern East, who have risen
to positions of power and importance, have possessed
their harems like other men. In ancient Babylonia
it was only the service of religion which the eunuch
was forbidden to enter. Such was doubtless the case
in Egypt also.
</p>

<p>
Egyptian research has brought to light a curious
parallel to the history of Joseph and Potiphar's wife.
It is found in one of the many tales, the equivalents
of the modern novel, in which the ancient Egyptians
delighted. The tale, which is usually known as that
of <q>The Two Brothers,</q> was written by the scribe
Enna for Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> of the nineteenth dynasty when he
was still crown-prince, and it embodies the folk-lore
of his native land. Enna lived under Meneptah,
the probable Pharaoh of the Exodus, and his work
was thus contemporaneous with the events which
brought about the release of the Israelites from their
<q>house of bondage.</q> How old the stories may be
upon which it is based it is impossible for us to tell.
</p>

<p>
Here is Professor Erman's translation of the commencement
of the tale:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Once upon a time there were two brothers, born
of one mother and of one father; the elder was
called Anup, the younger Bata. Now Anup possessed
a house and had a wife, whilst his younger
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
brother lived with him as a son. He it was who
wove (?) for him, and drove his cattle to the fields,
who ploughed and reaped; he it was who directed
all the business of the farm for him. The younger
brother was a good (farmer); the like of whom was
not to be found throughout the country.</q> One day
Anup sent Bata from the field to the house to fetch
seed-corn. <q rend='pre'>And he sent his younger brother,<note place='foot'>Brugsch's translation, <hi rend='italic'>Egypt under the Pharaohs</hi>, Eng. trans.
first edition, i. p. 266.</note> and
said to him: Hasten and bring me seed-corn from
the village. And his younger brother found the
wife of his elder brother occupied in combing her
hair. And he said to her: Rise up, give me seed-corn
that I may return to the field, for thus has my elder
brother enjoined me, to return without delaying.
The woman said to him: Go in, open the chest, that
thou mayst take what thine heart desires, for otherwise
my locks will fall to the ground. And the
youth went within into the stable, and took thereout
a large vessel, for it was his will to carry out much
seed-corn. And he loaded himself with wheat and
dhurra and went out with it. Then she said to him:
How great is the burden in thy arms? He said to
her: Two measures of dhurra and three measures of
wheat make together five measures which rest on my
arms. Thus he spake to her. But she spake to
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
the youth and said: How great is thy strength!
Well have I remarked thy power many a time.
And her heart knew him.... And she stood up
and laid hold of him and said unto him: Come let
us celebrate an hour's repose; the most beautiful
things shall be thy portion, for I will prepare for
thee festal garments. Then was the youth like unto
the panther of the south for rage on account of the
wicked word which she had spoken to him. But
she was afraid beyond all measure. And he spoke
to her and said: Thou, oh woman, hast been like
a mother to me and thy husband like a father, for
he is older than I, so that he might have been my
begetter. Wherefore this great sin that thou hast
spoken unto me? Say it not to me another time,
then will I this time not tell it, and no word of it
shall come out of my mouth to any man at all.
And he loaded himself with his burden and went
out into the field. And he went to his elder brother,
and they completed their day's work. And when
it was evening, the elder brother returned home to
his house. And his younger brother followed behind
his oxen, having laden himself with all the good
things of the field, and he drove his oxen before
him to bring them to the stable. And behold the
wife of his elder brother was afraid because of the
word which she had spoken, and she took a jar of fat
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
and was like to one to whom an evil-doer had offered
violence, since she wished to say to her husband: Thy
younger brother has offered me violence. And her
husband returned home at evening, according to his
daily custom, and found his wife lying stretched out
and suffering from injury. She poured no water over
his hands, as was her custom; she had not lighted
the lights for him, so that his house was in darkness,
and she lay there ill. And her husband said to
her: Who has had to do with thee? Lift thyself
up! She said to him: No one has had to do with
me except thy younger brother, since when he came
to take seed-corn for thee, he found me sitting alone
and said to me, <q>Come, let us make merry an hour
and repose: let down thy hair!</q> Thus he spake to
me; but I did not listen to him (but said), <q>See!
am I not thy mother, and is not thy elder brother
like a father to thee?</q> Thus I spoke to him, but
he did not hearken to my speech, but used force with
me that I might not tell thee. Now if thou allow
him to live I will kill myself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then the elder brother began to rage like a
panther: he sharpened his knife and took it in his
hand. And the elder brother stood behind the door
of the stable in order to kill the youth when he came
back in the evening to bring the oxen into the stable.
Now when the sun was setting and he had laden
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
himself with all the good things of the field, according
to his custom, he returned (to the house). And
his cow that first entered the stable said to him:
Beware! there stands thy elder brother before thee
with his knife in order to kill thee; run away from
him! So he heard what the first cow said. Then
the second entered and spake likewise. He looked
under the door of the stable, and saw the feet of
his brother, who was standing behind the door with
his knife in his hand. He threw his burden on the
ground and began to run away quickly. His elder
brother ran after him with his knife in his hand.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ra, the sun-god, however, came to the help of the
innocent youth, and interposed a river full of crocodiles
between him and his pursuer. All night long
the two brothers stood on either side of the water;
in the morning Bata convinced his brother that he
had done no wrong, and reproached him for having
believed that he could be guilty. Then he added:
<q>Go home now and see after thine oxen thyself,
for I will no longer stay with thee, but will go to
the acacia valley.</q> So Anup returned to his house,
put his wife to death, and sat there in solitude and
sadness.
</p>

<p>
Joseph, more fortunate than Bata, rose from his
prison to the highest office of state. The dreams,
through which this was accomplished, were in full
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
keeping with the belief of the age. Dreams even
to-day play an important part in the popular faith of
Egypt. In the days of the Pharaohs it was the same.
Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> cleared away the sand that had overwhelmed
the Sphinx, and built a temple between its
paws, in consequence of a dream in which Ra-Harmakhis
had appeared to him when, wearied with
hunting, he had lain down to sleep under the shadow
of the ancient monument. A thousand years later
Nut-Amon of Ethiopia was summoned by a dream
to march into Egypt. In Greek days, when the
temple of Abydos had fallen into ruin, an oracle was
established in one of its deserted chambers, and
those who consulted it received their answers in the
<q>true dreams</q> that came to them during the night.
The dreams, however, needed at times an interpreter
to explain them, and of such an interpreter mention
is made in a Greek inscription from the Serapeum
at Memphis. At other times the dreamer himself
could interpret his vision by the help of the books in
which the signification of dreams had been reduced
to a science.
</p>

<p>
The dreams of Pharaoh and <q>his two eunuchs,</q>
however, <q>the chief butler</q> and <q>the chief baker,</q> were
of a strange and novel kind, and there were no books
that could explain them. Even the <q>magicians</q> and
<q>wise men</q> of Egypt failed to understand the dream
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
of Pharaoh. And yet, when the Hebrew captive had
pointed out its meaning, no doubt remained in the
mind of Pharaoh and his servants that he was right.
From time immemorial the Nile had been likened to
a milch-cow, and the fertilising water which it spread
over the soil to the milk that sustains human life.
The cow-headed goddess Hathor or Isis watched
over the fertility of Egypt. It was said of her that
she <q>caused the Nile to overflow at his due time,</q> and
the <q>seven great Hathors</q> were the seven forms
under which she was worshipped. In the seven kine,
accordingly, which stood <q>upon the bank of the
river</q> the Egyptian readily saw the life-giving powers
of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
It needed but the word of the Pharaoh to change
the Hebrew slave into an Egyptian ruler, second
only to the monarch itself. His very name ceased to
be Semitic, and henceforth became Zaphnath-paaneah.
He even allied himself with the exclusive
priesthood of Heliopolis or On, marrying Asenath,
the daughter of the priest of Ra. By name and
marriage, as well as by position, he was thus adopted
into the ranks of the native aristocracy.
</p>

<p>
Such changes of name are not unknown to the
inscriptions. From time to time we meet with the
records of foreigners who had settled down in the
valley of the Nile and there received new names of
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
Egyptian origin. Thus a monument found at
Abydos tells us of a Canaanite from Bashan called
Ben-Azan, who received in Egypt the new name of
Yu-pa-â and was the father of a vizier of Meneptah, the
Pharaoh of the Exodus. The Hittite wife of Ramses
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> similarly adopted an Egyptian name, and the
tombstones of two Karians are preserved, in which the
Karian names of the dead are written in the letters
of the Karian alphabet, while a hieroglyphic text is
attached which gives the Egyptian names they had
borne in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The exact transcription in hieroglyphics of the
Egyptian name of Joseph is still doubtful. But it is
plain that it contains the Egyptian words <foreign rend='italic'>pa-ânkh</foreign>,
<q>the life,</q> or <q>the living one,</q> which seem to be preceded
by the particle <foreign rend='italic'>nti</foreign>, <q>of.</q> The term <foreign rend='italic'>pa-ânkh</foreign> is
sometimes applied to the Pharaoh, and since Kames,
the last king of the seventeenth dynasty,
assumed the title of Zaf-n-to, <q>nourisher of the land,</q>
it is possible that in Zaphnath-paaneah we may see
an Egyptian Zaf-nti-pa-ânkh, <q>nourisher of the
Pharaoh.</q> But the final solution of the question
must be left to future research.
</p>

<p>
It is now more easy to explain the cry which was
raised before Joseph when he went forth from the
presence of the Pharaoh with the golden chain
around his neck and the royal signet upon his finger.
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
<q><foreign rend='italic'>Abrêk!</foreign></q> they shouted before him, and an explanation
of the word has been vainly sought in the
Egyptian language. It really is of Babylonian
origin. In the primitive non-Semitic language of
Chaldæa <foreign rend='italic'>abrik</foreign> signified <q>a seer</q> or <q>soothsayer,</q> and
the term was borrowed by the Semitic Babylonians
under the two forms of <foreign rend='italic'>abrikku</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>abarakku</foreign>. Joseph
was thus proclaimed a seer, and his exaltation was
due to his power of foreseeing the future. It was as
a divinely-inspired seer that the subjects of the
Pharaoh were to reverence him.
</p>

<p>
How a Babylonian word like <foreign rend='italic'>abrek</foreign> came to be
used in Egypt it is idle for us to inquire. Those
who believe in the late origin and fictitious character
of the story of Joseph would find an easy explanation
of it. But easy explanations are not necessarily
true, either in archæology or in anything else. And
since we now know that Canaan, long before the
time of Joseph, had fallen under Babylonian
influence, that the Babylonian language and writing
were employed there, and that Babylonian words had
made their way into the native idiom, it does not
require much stretch of the imagination to suppose
that such words may have also penetrated to the
court of the Asiatic rulers of northern Egypt. Up
to the era of the Exodus, Egypt and Canaan were
for several centuries as closely connected with each
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
other as were England and the north of France in
the age of the Normans and Plantagenets.
</p>

<p>
The prosperity of Egypt depends upon the Nile.
If the river rises to too great a height during the
period of inundation, the autumn crops are damaged or
destroyed. If, on the other hand, its rise is insufficient
to fill the canals and basins, or to reach the higher
ground, the land remains unwatered, and nothing will
grow. Egypt, in fact, is the gift of the Nile; let the
channel of the great river be diverted elsewhere, and
the whole country would at once become an uninhabited
desert.
</p>

<p>
A low Nile consequently brings with it a scarcity
of food. When provisions cannot be imported from
abroad, famine is the necessary result, and the population
perishes in thousands. Such was the case in
the eleventh and twelfth centuries of our era, when
the inundation was deficient for several successive
years. The Arabic writers, El-Makrîzî and Abd-el-Latîf,
describe the famines that ensued in terrible
terms. Abd-el-Latîf was a witness of that which
lasted from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1200 to 1202, and of the horrors which
it caused. After eating grass, corpses, and even excrement,
the wretched inhabitants of the country began
to devour one another. Mothers were arrested in the
act of cooking their own children, and it was unsafe to
walk in the streets for fear of being murdered for food.
</p>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<p>
The famine described by El-Makrîzî lasted, like
that of Joseph, for seven years, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1064 to
1071, and was similarly occasioned by a deficient
Nile. A hieroglyphic inscription, discovered in 1888
by Mr. Wilbour in the island of Sehêl, contains a
notice of another famine of seven years, which
occurred at an earlier date. The island of Sehêl lies
in the Cataract, midway between Assouan and Philæ,
and the inscription is carved on a block of granite
and looks towards the south. It is dated in the
eighteenth year of a king, who was probably one of
the Ethiopian princes that reigned over southern
Egypt in the troublous age of the fourth and fifth
Ptolemies. According to Dr. Brugsch's translation,
it states that the king sent to the governor of Nubia
saying: <q>I am sorrowing upon my high throne over
those who belong to the palace. In sorrow is my
heart for the vast misfortune, because the Nile flood
in my time has not come for seven years. Light is
the grain; there is lack of crops and of all kinds of
food. Each man has become a thief to his neighbour.
They desire to hasten and cannot walk; the child
cries, the youth creeps along and the old man; their
souls are bowed down. Their legs are bent together
and drag along the ground, and their hands rest in
their bosoms. The counsel of the great ones of the
court is but emptiness. Torn open are the chests of
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
provisions, but instead of contents there is air.
Everything is exhausted.</q> The text then goes on to
declare how Khnum the Creator came to the help of
the Pharaoh, and caused the Nile once more to
inundate the lands. In return for this the king
gave the priests of Khnum at Elephantinê twenty
miles of river bank on either side of the island,
together with tithes of all the produce of the
country.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Brugsch has brought to light yet another
record of a famine in Upper Egypt which belongs
to an older period. Among the rock-cut tombs of
El-Kab, where the princes of Thebes held their court
in the days of the Hyksos, is one which commemorates
the name of a certain Baba. The name occurs
elsewhere at El-Kab, and was that of the father of
<q>Captain Ahmes,</q> whose tomb is one of the most
interesting there, and who, in his youthful days,
assisted Ahmes of the eighteenth dynasty in driving
the Hyksos from their last fortress in Egypt. Baba
enumerates his wealth and many good deeds, and
adds: <q>When a famine arose, lasting many years, I
issued out corn to the city.</q>
</p>

<p>
It may be that the famine here referred to is the
famine of Joseph. All we know about the date of
Baba is that he lived in the age of the Hyksos. If he
flourished before the war of independence and in
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
days when the authority of the Hyksos Pharaoh was
still paramount in Upper Egypt, we should have
good reason for believing that the famine of which he
speaks was the same as that described in Genesis.
One of the results of the latter was that the Egyptians
parted with their lands and stock to Joseph, so that
henceforth they became the tenants of the Pharaoh,
to whom they paid a fifth of all their produce. If
this statement is historical, the administration of
Joseph must have extended from one end of Egypt
to the other. His Hyksos master must have been
like Apopi, of whom the Sallier Papyrus tells us that
<q>the entire country paid him tribute, together with its
manufactured products, and so loaded him with all
the good things of Egypt.</q>
</p>

<p>
The account of Joseph's famine, however, betrays
in one respect a sign of later date. The famine is
said to have extended to Canaan. But a famine in
Egypt and a famine in Canaan were not due to the
same cause, and the failure of the waters of the Nile
would have no effect upon the crops of Palestine. In
Canaan it was the want of rain, not of the inundation
of the Nile, which produced a failure of corn. We
hear from time to time, in the inscriptions, of corn
being sent from Egypt to Syria, but it was when
there was plenty on the banks of the Nile and a
scarcity of rain on the Syrian coast. The Hebrew
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
writer has regarded the history of the past from a
purely Asiatic rather than an Egyptian point of view.
</p>

<p>
Joseph must have entered Egypt when it was
still under Hyksos domination. The promise made
to Abraham (Gen. xv. 13) is very explicit: <q>Know
of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a
land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and
they shall afflict them four hundred years.</q> Equally
explicit is the statement of the book of Exodus
(xii. 40, 41): <q>The sojourning of the children of
Israel who dwelt in Egypt was four hundred and
thirty years. And it came to pass at the end of the
four hundred and thirty years, even the self-same day
it came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went
out from the land of Egypt.</q> Here thirty years&mdash;the
length of a generation&mdash;are added to the four hundred
during which the Israelites were to be afflicted
in the land of the foreigner. If the Exodus took
place in the latter years of the nineteenth dynasty&mdash;-and,
as we shall see, the Egyptian monuments forbid
our placing it elsewhere&mdash;the four hundred and thirty
years of the Biblical narrative bring us to the beginning
of the last Hyksos dynasty.
</p>

<p>
It is a curious fact that Egyptian history also
knows of an epoch of four hundred years which
covers almost the same period as the four hundred
years of Genesis. Mariette Pasha, when excavating
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
at Sân, the ancient Zoan, found a stela which had
been erected in the reign of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> by one of his
officers, the governor of the Asiatic frontier. The
stela commemorates a visit to Sân made by the
governor, on the fourth day of the month Mesori,
in the four hundredth year of <q>the king of Upper
and Lower Egypt, Set-âa-pehti, the son of the
Sun who loved him, also named Set-Nubti.</q> Since
Set or Sutekh was the god of the Hyksos, while Sân
was the Hyksos capital, it is clear that Set-âa-pehti
or Set-Nubti was a Hyksos prince who claimed rule
over the whole of Egypt, and with whom a Hyksos
era commenced. Professor Maspero and Dr. de
Cara consider the prince in question to have been
really the god Sutekh himself; this, however, is not
the natural interpretation of the titles assigned to
him, and it is not improbable that Professor Wiedemann
is right in identifying him with a certain
Hyksos Pharaoh, Set-[Nub?]ti, mentioned on a
monument discovered by Mariette at Tel-Mokdam.
This latter Pharaoh is entitled <q>the good god, the
star of Upper and Lower Egypt, the son of the Sun,
beloved by Sutekh, the lord of Avaris.</q>
</p>

<p>
But whether or not the Hyksos Pharaoh of Tel-Mokdam
is the same as Set-Nubti of Sân, it would
seem probable that the era connected with his name
marked the rise of the last Hyksos dynasty. According
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
to Eusebius, the leader of this dynasty was Saitês,
a name which reminds us of Set-âa-[pehti]. Eusebius
makes the length of the dynasty 103 years, but
Africanus, a more trustworthy authority, gives it as
151 years. This would assign the rise of the seventeenth
dynasty, the last of Hyksos rule, to about
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1720, a date which agrees very well with that
of the monument of Sân.<note place='foot'>Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> reigned from <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1348 to 1281; if the stela of Sân
had been erected in the twenty-eighth year of his reign, four hundred
years would take us back to <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1720. The Syrian wars were concluded
by the treaty with the Hittites in the twenty-first year of his
reign.</note> The Exodus of the
Israelites, if it took place in the reign of Meneptah,
would have happened about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1270 (or <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1250,
if it occurred in the reign of Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, as Professor
Maspero maintains); in this case the 430 years of
sojourning in the land of Egypt brings us to <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
1700 (or 1680). This would be about twenty years
after the establishment of the last Hyksos line of
Pharaohs, and one hundred and thirty years before
the foundation of the eighteenth dynasty. Joseph
would thus have been vizier of the country long
before the war of independence broke out, and there
would have been time in abundance for him to have
lived and died before his friends and protectors were
driven from the land they had so long occupied.
</p>

<p>
Chronologically, therefore, the Biblical narrative
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
fits in with the requirements of Egyptian history,
and allows us to see in the Hebrew captive the
powerful minister of a race of kings who, like himself,
had come from the highlands of Asia. But it
must be remembered that it was only in the north
of Egypt that Hyksos rule made itself actually
visible to the eyes of the people. Southern Egypt
was nominally governed by its native princes, though
they did not assume the title of king or Pharaoh.
They were <foreign rend='italic'>hiqu</foreign>, <q>hereditary chieftains,</q> the last representatives
of the royal families of earlier days.
They acknowledged the supremacy of the Hyksos
Pharaoh, and tribute was sent to him from Thebes
and El-Kab.
</p>

<p>
Though Memphis, the ancient capital of the
country, was in the hands of the strangers, Zoan,
the Tanis of classical geography, was rather the
seat of Hyksos power. Protected by the marshes
which surrounded it, Zoan, the modern Sân, lay on
the eastern side of the Delta at no great distance
from the frontier of Asia and the great Hyksos
fortress of Avaris. From Zoan, the <q>road of the
Philistines,</q> as it is called in the Pentateuch, ran
almost in a straight line to Pelusium and the south
of Palestine, skirting on one side the Mediterranean
Sea, and leaving to the right the lofty fortress-rock
of El-Arîsh on the waterless <q>river of Egypt.</q>
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
Tanis had existed in the days of the Old Empire,
but either the Hyksos conquest or earlier invasions
had caused it to decay, and when the Hyksos court
was established there its ancient temple was already
in ruins. The restoration of the city was due to
the Hyksos kings, who have left in it memorials of
themselves. The Hyksos sphinxes in the Museum
of Gizeh, on one of which the name of Apopi is
engraved, were found there by Mariette, as well as
a curious group of two persons with enormous wigs
holding fish and water-fowl in their laps. When
it is stated in the book of Numbers (xiii. 22) that
<q>Hebron was built seven years before Zoan,</q> it is
probable that the building of Zoan by the Shepherd
kings is meant.
</p>

<p>
In journeying from southern Palestine to Zoan,
Jacob and his sons had no very long distance to
traverse. Nor had they to pass through a long
tract of Egyptian territory. From the desert, with
its roving bands of kindred Bedouin, to the Pharaoh's
court at Zoan, was hardly more than a day's journey.
There was little fear that the Semitic traveller would
meet with insult or opposition from the Egyptian
<foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> on the way. The <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> themselves were
doubtless then, as now, mixed with Semitic elements;
it was needful to go westward of Zoan in order to
find Egyptians of pure blood.
</p>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
Nor was the land of Goshen, the modern Wadi
Tumilât, far from the Hyksos capital. It lay to
the south of Zoan, on the banks of a canal whose
course is now marked by the Freshwater Canal of
Lesseps. The tourist who takes the train from
Ismailîyeh to Zagazig traverses the whole length of
the land of Goshen. The tradition that here was
the territory assigned by Joseph to his brethren
lingered long into the Christian centuries, and had
been revived by more than one Egyptologist in later
years. But the question was finally settled by Dr.
Naville, and the excavations he undertook for the
Egypt Exploration Fund. In 1883 he disinterred
the remains of Pa-Tum, or Pithom, one of the two
<q>store-cities</q> which the children of Israel were forced
to build. The ruins are now known as Tel el-Maskhuteh,
<q>the mound of the Statue,</q> about twelve miles
to the south-east of Ismailîyeh, and the monuments
discovered there show that the Pharaoh for whom
the city was built was Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> There was more
than one Pa-Tum, or temple-city of the Sun-god of
the evening, and the Pa-Tum of the eastern Delta is
referred to in papyri of the nineteenth dynasty.
Thus, in the eighth year of Meneptah <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, an official
report speaks of the passage of certain Shasu or
Bedouin from Edom through the frontier-fortress
of Thukut or Succoth, to <q>the pools of the city of
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
Pa-Tum of Meneptah-hotep-hir-ma, in the district
of Thukut.</q>
</p>

<p>
In 1884 Dr. Naville excavated, at Saft el-Henneh,
an ancient mound close to the railway between
Zagazig and Tel el-Kebîr. His excavations resulted
in the discovery that Saft el-Henneh marks the site
of the ancient Qesem or Qos (Pha-kussa in the
Greek geographers), the capital of the nome of the
Egyptian Arabia. Qesem corresponds exactly with
Geshem, which represents in the Septuagint the
Hebrew Goshen, and points to the fact that the
Egyptian Jews, to whom the Greek translation of
the Old Testament was due, recognised in the Biblical
Goshen the Qeshem of Egyptian geography.
</p>

<p>
The district immediately around Saft el-Henneh
is fertile, but the name of the Egyptian Arabia which
it once bore shows unmistakably who its cultivators
must have been. They were the Semitic nomads
from the East who, like their descendants to-day,
occasionally settled on the frontier-lands of Egypt,
and became more or less unwilling agriculturists.
But the larger part of them remained shepherds,
leading a nomad life with their flocks and camels,
and pitching their tents wherever the monotony of
the desert was broken by water and vegetation.
The Wadi Tumilât, into which the district of Saft
el-Henneh opened, was thus eminently suited for
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
the residence of the Hebrew Bedouin. Here they
had food for their flocks, plenty of space for their
camping-grounds, and freedom from interference on
the part of the Egyptians, while in the background
was a fertile district, in close connection with the
capital, where those of them who cared to exchange
a pastoral for an agricultural life could find rich soil
to sow and cultivate.
</p>

<p>
Hard by Zagazig are the mounds of the ancient
Bubastis, and here the excavations carried on by
the Egypt Exploration Fund have brought to light
remains of the Hyksos Pharaohs, including one of
Apopi. Bubastis, therefore, must have been a Hyksos
residence, and its temple was adorned by the Hyksos
kings. Between Bubastis and Heliopolis stood Pa-Bailos,
and of this town Meneptah <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> says at Thebes
that <q>the country around was not cultivated, but left
as pasture for cattle because of the strangers, having
been abandoned since the times of old.</q> What better
proof can we have that the Arabian nome was in
truth what the land of Goshen is represented to be?
</p>

<p>
By a curious coincidence, the Wadi Tumilât, the
old land of Goshen, has, in the present century, again
been handed over to Bedouin and Syrians, and again
been the scene of an Exodus. Mohammed Ali was
anxious to establish the culture of the silk-worm in
Egypt, and accordingly planted mulberry-trees in
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
the Wadi Tumilât, and settled there a large colony
of Syrians and Bedouin. The Bedouin were induced
to remain there, partly by the pasturage provided
for their flocks, partly by a promise of exemption
from taxes and military conscription. When
Abbas Pasha became Khedive, however, the promise
was forgotten; orders were issued that the free
Bedouin of the Wadi Tumilât should be treated
like the enslaved <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign>, compelled to pay the tax-gatherer,
and to see their children driven in handcuffs
and with the courbash to serve in the army. But
the orders were never carried out. Suddenly, in a
single night, without noise or warning, the whole
Bedouin population deserted their huts, and with
their flocks and other possessions disappeared into
the eastern desert. The Pasha lost his slaves, the
culture of the silk-worm ceased, and when the Freshwater
Canal was cut not a single mulberry-tree remained.
</p>

<p>
In the land of Goshen, the Israelitish settlers
throve and multiplied. But a time came when a
new king arose <q>which knew not Joseph,</q> and when
the descendants of Jacob seemed to the Egyptians
a source of danger. Like Abbas Pasha in a later
century, the Pharaoh determined to reduce the
free-born Israelites into the condition of public
slaves, and by every means in his power to diminish
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
their number. The male children were destroyed,
the adults compelled to labour at the cities the
Egyptian monarch was building in their neighbourhood,
and the land in which they lived was surrounded
by Egyptian garrisons and controlled by
Egyptian officers.
</p>

<p>
The slaves, however, succeeded in escaping from
their <q>house of bondage.</q> Under the leadership of
Moses they made their way into the eastern desert,
and received, at Sinai and Kadesh-Barnea, the laws
which were henceforth to govern them. The army
sent to pursue them was swallowed up in the waters
of the sea, and the district they had occupied was left
desolate.
</p>

<p>
A variety of reasons had led Egyptologists to the
belief that in the Pharaoh of the Oppression we were
probably to see Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, the Sesostris
and Osymandyas of Greek story, was the third king
of the nineteenth dynasty, and one of the most striking
figures of Egyptian history. His long reign of
sixty-seven years was the evening of Egyptian greatness.
With his death the age of Egyptian conquests
passed away, and the period of decay set in. Like
Louis <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi> of France, the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>grand monarque</foreign> of
ancient Egypt exhausted in his wars the resources
and fighting population of his country.
</p>

<p>
But it was as a builder rather than as a conqueror
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
that Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> was famous. Go where we will in
Egypt or Nubia, we find traces of his architectural
activity. There is hardly a place where he has not
left his name. His whole reign must have been
occupied with the construction of cities and temples,
or the restoration and enlargement of previously existing
ones, and, in spite of its length, it is difficult to
understand how so vast an amount of work could
have been accomplished in the time. Much of the
work, however, is poor and scamped; it bears, in
fact, marks of the feverish haste with which it was
carried through. Much of it, on the other hand, is
grandiose and striking in its colossal proportions and
boldness of design. The shattered granite colossus
at the Ramesseum, once nearly sixty feet in height,
the fragment of a standing figure of granite found by
Professor Flinders Petrie at Sân, which must originally
have been over a hundred feet high, the great hall
of columns at Karnak, the temple of Abu-Simbel in
Nubia, are all so many witnesses of vast conceptions
successfully realised. Abu-Simbel, indeed, where a
mountain has been hollowed into a temple, and a cliff
carved into the likeness of four sitting figures, each
with an unrivalled expression of divine calm upon
its countenance, justly claims to be one of the wonders
of the world.
</p>

<p>
Apart from the colossal proportions of so many of
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
them, the buildings of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> are distinguished by
another trait. They were erected to the glory of the
Pharaoh rather than of the gods. It is the name and
titles of Ramses that everywhere force themselves
upon our notice, and often constitute the chief decoration
of the monument. He must have been vainglorious
above all other kings of Egypt, filled with
the pride of his own power and the determination that
his name should never be forgotten upon the earth.
</p>

<p>
It is not strange, therefore, that Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> should
be the most prominent figure in ancient Egyptian
history. His name and the shattered relics of his
architectural triumphs force themselves upon the
attention of the traveller wherever he goes. His long
reign, moreover, was a period of great literary activity,
and a considerable portion of the literary papyri
which have survived to us was written during his
lifetime. He was, furthermore, the last of the conquering
Pharaohs; the last of the Theban monarchs
whose rule was obeyed from the mountains of
Lebanon and the plateau of the Haurân to the
southern frontiers of Ethiopia. With his death the
empire, which had been founded by the military skill
and energy of the kings of the eighteenth dynasty,
began to pass away. His son and successor, Meneptah,
had to struggle for bare existence against an invasion
of barbarian hordes, and the sceptre dropped from
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
the feeble hands of Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, who next followed, into
those of rival kings. The nineteenth dynasty ended
in the midst of civil war and foreign attack: for
a while Egypt submitted to the rule of a Syrian
stranger, and when Setnekht, the founder of the
twentieth dynasty, restored once more the native line
of kings, he found a ruined and impoverished country,
scarcely able to protect itself from hostile assault.
</p>

<p>
But the age of the twentieth dynasty was still
distant when Jacob and his sons journeyed into
Egypt, or even when his descendants, under the
leadership of Moses, succeeded in escaping from the
land of their slavery. Before that age arrived more
than one revolution was destined to pass over the
valley of the Nile, which had momentous consequences
for the foreign settlers in Goshen. The Hyksos were
driven back into Asia, and a united Egypt once
more obeyed the rule of a native Pharaoh.
</p>

<p>
But the centre of power had been shifted from the
north to the south. Memphis and Zoan had to make
way for Thebes, and it is probable that the monarchs
of the eighteenth dynasty, under whom Egypt recovered
its independence, had Nubian blood in their
veins. A new life was breathed into the ancient
kingdom of Menes, and for the first time in its
history Egypt became a great military power. The
war was transferred from the Delta to Asia itself;
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
Canaan and Syria were conquered, and an Egyptian
empire established, which extended as far as the
Euphrates. With this empire in Asia, however,
came Asiatic influences, ideas, and beliefs. The
Pharaohs intermarried with the royal families of
Asia, and little by little their court became semi-Asiatic.
Then followed reaction and counter-revolution.
A new king arose&mdash;the founder of the
nineteenth dynasty&mdash;<q>who knew not Joseph,</q> representing
the national antagonism to the Asiatic
foreigner and his religious faith. For a while the
Asiatic was proscribed; and the expulsion of the
stranger and his religion, which Arabi endeavoured
to effect in our time, was successfully effected in the
troublous days which saw the fall of the eighteenth
dynasty. In this war against the hated Asiatic the
Israelites were involved; their children were destroyed
lest they should multiply, and they themselves
were degraded into public slaves. We have
now to trace the events which led to such a result,
and to show how the political history of Egypt was
the ultimate cause of the Israelitish Exodus.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Age Of Moses.</head>

<p>
On the eastern bank of the Nile, about midway
between Minieh and Assiout, the traveller from Cairo
to Assouan passes a line of mounds which are known
by the name of Tel el-Amarna. <foreign rend='italic'>Tel</foreign> is the name
given to the artificial mounds which cover the
remains of ancient cities, while <foreign rend='italic'>el-Amarna</foreign> denotes
the Bedouin tribe of Beni-Amran whose descendants
inhabit the district in which the line of mounds is
found. Between the mounds and the Nile is a fertile
strip of bank, green with corn in the winter and
spring, and shaded with groves of lofty palms. On
the other side of them is a tawny desert plain, shut in
by an amphitheatre of hills. The limestone cliffs of
the latter are broken in three places, where ravines
lead through them to the Arabian plateau beyond.
The central ravine is short and rugged; that to the
north, however, though its lofty walls of rock seem at
times almost to meet, eventually carries the explorer
by a slow ascent into the heart of the Arabian
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
desert. About three miles from its mouth, and in a
side-valley, the tomb has lately been discovered of
the founder of the city, of which the mounds of Tel
el-Amarna are now the sole representatives. The
tomb is worthy of the monarch for whom it was intended.
In the distant solitude of the desert gorge, it
is cut deep into the solid rock. Steps first convey the
visitor downwards to the huge door of the sepulchre.
Within is a broad sloping passage, to the right of
which are the sculptured chambers in which the body
of one of the Pharaoh's daughters once rested, while
at the end of it is a vast columned hall, within which
the sarcophagus of the Pharaoh himself was placed.
</p>

<p>
The Pharaoh had been named by his father,
Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, after himself, but Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>
had not long mounted the throne before he gave
himself a new name, and was henceforth known
as Khu-n-Aten, <q>the Glory of the Solar Disk.</q>
The change of name was the outward sign and
token of a religious revolution. The king publicly
renounced the ancient religion of Egypt, of which
he was the official representative, and declared
himself a convert to an Asiatic form of faith. The
very name of Amon, the supreme god of Thebes and
of the royal family to which Khu-n-Aten belonged,
was proscribed, and erased from the monuments
wherever it occurred. In the temples and tombs and
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
quarries alike it was defaced; even the name of
the king's own father, which contained it, was not
spared. When the arm of the persecutor was thus
extended to the written and sculptured monument,
we cannot suppose that the adherents of the ancient
cult would be treated with a gentle hand.
</p>

<p>
It was not long before the Pharaoh and the powerful
hierarchy of Thebes were at open war. But the
priesthood proved too strong for the king. He
quitted the capital of his fathers and built himself a
new city farther north. It is the site of this city
which is now covered by the mounds of Tel el-Amarna.
</p>

<p>
Towards the northern side of it rose the palace
of the Pharaoh, whose ruins have been explored by
Professor Flinders Petrie. It was one of the most
gorgeous edifices ever erected by man. The walls
and columns were inlaid with gold and bronze and
stones of various colours, and adorned with statuary
and painting. Even the floors were frescoed; and, if
we may judge from the one discovered by Professor
Petrie, the art was of the highest order. The plants
and animals and fish depicted on it are drawn with a
perfection and a truthfulness to nature which seem to
belong to the nineteenth century of our era rather
than to the fifteenth century before Christ.
</p>

<p>
The public offices of the government adjoined the
palace, and around it were the houses of the nobles
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
and officers of the court. They too reflected the
gay and brilliant adornment of the royal palace, and
their walls were enlivened by frescoes, which represented
the scenes of every-day life. Among the
public offices was the archive-chamber, to which the
documents of state had been transferred from Thebes,
as well as the foreign office, where scribes were busily
engaged in correspondence with the governors of the
Asiatic provinces of the empire and the princes of
foreign states.
</p>

<p>
In the centre of the city rose the great temple of
Aten, the solar disk, the new object of the Pharaoh's
adoration. Though the name was Egyptian, the
deity and his cult were alike of Asiatic origin. The
Aten, in fact, to whom the temple had been reared,
was the Asiatic Baal. He was the Sun-god, whose
visible manifestation was the solar disk. But it was
a Sun-god who was not only supreme over all other
gods; they were absorbed into him, and existed only
in so far as he endowed them with divine life. It
is thus that Aten-Ra, the solar disk of the Sun-god,
is addressed by the Pharaoh's queen: <q>Thou disk
of the Sun, thou living god, there is none other
beside thee! Thou givest health to the eyes through
thy beams, Creator of all things!</q> One of Khu-n-Aten's
officers, on the walls of his tomb, speaks in
similar terms: <q>Thou, O god, who in truth art the
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
living one, standest before the two eyes. Thou art
he which createst what never was, which formest
everything, which art in all things: we also have
come into being through the word of thy mouth.</q>
</p>

<p>
The new faith of Egypt was a combination of
the worship of Baal with the philosophic conceptions
which had gathered round the worship of the
Egyptian Sun-god, Ra, at Heliopolis. The worship
of Baal had lost its grossness, and been refined into
a form of monotheism. But the monotheism was
essentially pantheistic; there was, indeed, but one
god to whom adoration was paid, but he was universally
diffused throughout nature. The personal
character of the Asiatic Baal seems to have disappeared
in the Aten worship of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Along with the new religion came a new style
of art. Asiatic artists and workmen manufactured
the variegated glass and bright-coloured porcelain
of Tel el-Amarna, or discarded the conventionalism
of Egyptian art in their delineation of animal and
vegetable life, while architecture branched out in
new directions, and the sculptor exaggerated the
peculiarities of the king's personal appearance.
Every effort, in fact, was made to break away from
the past, and from the mannerisms and traditions
of Egyptian art. That art had been closely associated
with the ancient religion of the country, and
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
with the change of religion came a change in all
things else.
</p>

<p>
The causes of the change can now in great
measure be traced. To some extent it was due to
the character of the king himself. A plaster cast
of his face, taken immediately after death, has been
found by Professor Petrie, and is an eloquent witness
of what the man himself was like. It is the face
of a philosopher and a mystic, of one whose interest
lay rather in the problems of religious belief than
in the affairs of state. In studying it we feel that
the man to whom it belonged was destined to be
a religious reformer.
</p>

<p>
But this destiny was assisted by the training and
education which Khu-n-Aten had received. His
mother, Teie, bore a foremost part in the introduction
of the cult of Aten. She must have been a
woman of strong character, and her influence over
her son must also have been great. If, as is probable,
Khu-n-Aten was very young when he ascended
the throne, the religious reform he endeavoured to
effect must have been in great measure his mother's
work. That she had aroused deep feelings of hatred
among the adherents of the older creed may be
gathered from the condition of Khu-n-Aten's tomb.
Though the body of the Pharaoh was despoiled, and
the sarcophagus in which it rested shattered into
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
fragments, they had nevertheless been deposited in
the sepulchre that had been constructed to receive
them. But no trace of the queen-mother's mummy
has been met with, and the corridor in the royal
tomb, which seems to have been excavated for her,
has never been finished, any more than the two or
three tombs which were cut in the immediate neighbourhood.
After the death of her son, Queen Teie
seems to have found no protector from the vengeance
of her enemies.
</p>

<p>
It is probable that Teie was of Asiatic birth,
though no certain proof of it has yet been found.
Her husband, Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, was fond of connecting
himself by marriage with the royal houses of Asia,
and more than one of the wives who occupied a
secondary rank in the Pharaoh's household were of
Asiatic extraction. His own mother had been an
Asiatic princess, the daughter of the king of Mitanni,
the Aram-Naharaim of the Old Testament. From
Mitanni also had come two of his own wives, as well
as the wife of his son and successor, Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>
(Khu-n-Aten).
</p>

<p>
There is little room for wonder that, with their
Asiatic proclivities and half-Asiatic descent, the later
Pharaohs of the eighteenth dynasty should have surrounded
themselves with Asiatic officials and courtiers.
The conquest of Western Asia by Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> had
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
brought Asiatic fashions into Egypt. Thothmes himself,
on the walls of his temple at Karnak, shows the
spirit of an Asiatic rather than of an Egyptian conqueror.
The inscriptions engraved upon them differ
wholly from those which usually adorn the walls of
an Egyptian temple. There are no praises or lists
of the gods, no description of the offerings made to
them, no interminable catalogue of the empty titles
of the Pharaoh; we have, on the contrary, a business-like
account of his campaigns, much of it copied from
the memoranda of the scribes who accompanied the
army on its march. It reads like an inscription on
the walls of an Assyrian palace rather than one
belonging to an Egyptian temple. It is, in fact,
unique, the solitary example of a historical text
which the great monuments of Egypt have bequeathed
to us. It is, of itself, an eloquent testimony
to the influence which Asia had already
acquired in the valley of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
The conquests of Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> placed the
northern boundary of the Egyptian empire at the
banks of the Euphrates. The kingdoms to the east,
including Assyria, offered tribute to the Egyptian
monarch, and those of northern Syria and eastern
Asia Minor paid him homage. Farther south,
Palestine, Phœnicia, and the land of the Amorites,
which lay to the north of Palestine, became Egyptian
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
provinces, garrisoned by Egyptian troops and administered
by Egyptian officers. Even the country
beyond the Jordan, Bashan and the Haurân, formed
part of the Egyptian empire.
</p>

<p>
In many cases the native princes were left to
manage the affairs of their several states, like the
protected princes of modern India, but they were
controlled by <q>commissioners</q> sent from the valley
of the Nile. More frequently their place was taken
by Egyptian governors, a very considerable number
of whom, however, were of Canaanitish descent.
This, indeed, is one of the most remarkable facts
connected with the Egyptian empire in Asia; it
was governed for the Pharaoh by natives rather than
by Egyptians. But this was not all. Under Khu-n-Aten
Egypt itself was invaded by the Asiatic
stranger. The high places about the court were
filled with foreigners whose names proclaim their
Canaanitish origin; even the Vizier was called Dudu,
the Biblical Dodo, to which the name of David is
akin. The adherents of the cult of Aten who
gathered round the Pharaoh at Tel el-Amarna seem
largely to have belonged to Asia instead of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Even the official language and writing were of
Asiatic derivation. The language was that of Babylonia,
the script was the cuneiform syllabary of the
same country. The Babylonian script and language
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
were used from the banks of the Euphrates to those
of the Nile. They were the common medium of
intercourse throughout the civilised world. It is in
these that an Egyptian official writes to his master,
and it is again in these that the reply is sent from
the Egyptian foreign office.
</p>

<p>
The fact is a very surprising one, but recent
discoveries have tended to explain it. At a very
remote epoch Babylonian armies had made their
way to the west, and Palestine was a province of
Babylonia long before it became a province of Egypt.
The long-continued and deep-seated influence of
Babylonia brought to it the culture and civilisation
of the Babylonian cities. The Babylonian system
of writing formed a very important element in this
ancient culture, and, along with the language of
which it was the expression, took deep root in
Western Asia. How long it continued to be employed
there may be gathered from the fact that
each district of Western Asia developed its own
peculiar form of cuneiform script.
</p>

<p>
All this we have learned from a discovery made
in 1887 in the mounds of Tel el-Amarna. Among
the ruins of the foreign office of Khu-n-Aten, which
adjoined the royal palace, the <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> found a collection
of clay tablets inscribed with cuneiform or
wedge-shaped characters. They turned out to be
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
the foreign correspondence of Khu-n-Aten and his
father. When Khu-n-Aten quitted Thebes he took
with him the archives of his father, and to these
were subsequently added the official letters which he
himself received.
</p>

<p>
Altogether, about three hundred tablets were discovered.
But no one was on the spot who could
appreciate their value, and, owing to a series of
deplorable accidents, several of them were injured or
destroyed before they fell into European hands.
Eighty-two found their way to the British Museum,
more than 160 fragments are at Berlin, the Gizeh
Museum possesses 56, and a few are in the hands of
private individuals.
</p>

<p>
The tablets have thrown a new and unexpected
light on the history of the past. To find that the
language and script of Babylonia were the common
medium of literary and official intercourse throughout
Western Asia in the century before the Exodus
was sufficiently startling; it was much more startling
to find that this early period was emphatically a
literary era. Letters passed to and fro along the
high-roads upon the most trifling subjects, and a
constant correspondence was maintained between the
court of the Pharaoh and the most distant parts of
Western Asia. The Bedouin chiefs beyond the
Jordan send letters protesting their loyalty to the
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
Egyptian monarch, and declaring that their forces
were at his disposal; the vassal-king of Jerusalem
begs for help from Egypt to protect him against his
personal enemies; the governors of Phœnicia and
the land of the Amorites describe the threatening
attitude of the Hittites in the north; the king of
Mitanni or Aram-Naharaim dwells with pride on his
relationship to the ruler of the Egyptian empire;
while the kings of Assyria and Babylonia ask that
gold may be sent them from Egypt, where it is as
plentiful as <q>the dust,</q> or discuss questions of international
policy or commercial interest. We are
suddenly transported to a world much like our own;&mdash;a
world in which education is widely spread, where
schools and scholars abound, and libraries and archive-chambers
exist.
</p>

<p>
The nature of the cuneiform system of writing
would of itself indicate that schools were numerous.
It was a system which was extraordinarily difficult
to learn. Unlike the hieroglyphs of Egypt, no assistance
was afforded to the memory by any resemblance
between the characters and external objects; like
the Chinese characters of to-day, they consisted
merely of groups of conventionally arranged lines or
wedges. Like the Egyptian hieroglyphs, however,
the number of characters was extremely large, and
each character not only represented more than one
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
phonetic value, but it could also be used ideographically
to express ideas. Thus the same character may
not only represent the phonetic values <hi rend='italic'>kur</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mat</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>nat</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lat</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>sat</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>gin</hi>; it may also denote the ideas of
<q>country,</q> <q>mountain,</q> and <q>conquest.</q> But this was
not all. The original picture-writing out of which
the cuneiform syllabary developed, had been invented
by the primitive non-Semitic population of Chaldæa,
from whom it had been afterwards adopted and
adapted by their Semitic successors. Accordingly,
whole groups of characters which denoted a particular
word in Sumerian&mdash;the non-Semitic language of
ancient Chaldæa&mdash;were taken over by the Semites
and used by them to denote the same word, though,
of course, with a totally different pronunciation. In
Sumerian, for example, <foreign rend='italic'>mer-sig</foreign> signified <q>trousers,</q>
but though the two characters <hi rend='italic'>mer</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>sig</hi> continued
to be written in Semitic times in order to express
the word, the pronunciation attached to them was
<foreign rend='italic'>sarbillu</foreign>, the modern Arabic <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>shirwâl</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The pupil, therefore, who wished to learn the cuneiform
syllabary at all thoroughly was compelled to know
something of the old Sumerian language of Chaldæa.
It was far more necessary in his case than a knowledge
of Latin would be in our own. Moreover, it
was necessary for him to learn the various forms
which the same cuneiform character assumed in
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
different countries or at different periods in the same
country. These various forms were very numerous,
and they often differed more than black letter differs
from ordinary modern type.
</p>

<p>
The fact, then, that the cuneiform syllabary was
studied and used from the banks of the Euphrates to
those of the Nile, brings with it the further fact
that throughout this area there must have been
numerous schools and teachers. Time and persevering
labour were needed for its acquisition, while a
knowledge of the Babylonian language which accompanied
its study could not have been obtained without
the help of teachers. It is accordingly a matter
of no small astonishment that the letters received at
the Egyptian foreign office were written, not only by
professional scribes, but also by officials and soldiers.
</p>

<p>
Naturally the study of the foreign syllabary and
language was facilitated in every possible way. In
his excavations at Tel el-Amarna, Professor Flinders
Petrie has discovered fragments of lists of cuneiform
characters, as well as of comparative dictionaries of
Semitic Babylonian and Sumerian. Moreover, a
Babylonian mythological text has been found, in
which the words have been divided from one another
by dots of red paint, in order to assist the learner in
making his way through the legend.
</p>

<p>
This mythological text is not the only one which
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
has been met with among the tablets of Tel el-Amarna.
The existence of such texts is a proof
that the literature of Babylonia, as well as its
language and script, was carried to the West. From
very remote times public libraries, consisting for the
most part of clay-books, were to be found in the
Babylonian and Assyrian cities, and when Babylonian
culture made its way to the West, similar libraries
must have sprung up there also. The revelations
made to us by the tablets of Tel el-Amarna show
that these libraries, like those of Babylonia, were
stocked with books written upon clay, many of which
contained copies of Babylonian legends and myths.
</p>

<p>
One of the mythological tales discovered at Tel
el-Amarna is the latter portion of a story which described
the creation of the first man, Adapa or Adama,
and the introduction of death into the world. Adapa
had broken the wings of the south wind, and was
accordingly ordered to appear before Anu, the lord
of the sky. There he refused to touch the food and
water of <q>death</q> that were offered him, and when
subsequently the heart of Anu was <q>softened</q> towards
him, he refused also the food and water of
<q>life.</q> Whereupon <q>Anu looked upon him and raised
his voice in lamentation: <q>O Adapa, wherefore eatest
thou not? wherefore drinkest thou not? The gift of
life cannot now be thine.</q></q>
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
The beginning of the story has been in the British
Museum many years. It is a fragment of a copy of
the myth which was made for the library of Nineveh
some eight centuries after the rest of the story, which
has now been disinterred on the banks of the Nile, had
been buried under the ruins of Khu-n-Aten's city.
I copied it nearly twenty years ago, but had to wait
for the discovery of the tablets of Tel el-Amarna
before ascertaining its true meaning and significance.
Nineveh and Tel el-Amarna had to unite in the
restoration of the old Babylonian myth.
</p>

<p>
Canaan was the country in which the two streams
of Babylonian and Egyptian culture met together,
and we now know that Canaan was the centre of
that literary activity which the Tel el-Amarna tablets
have revealed to us. Canaan, in the age of the
eighteenth dynasty, was emphatically the land of
scribes and letter-writers. If libraries existed anywhere
in Western Asia, they would surely have done
so in the cities of Canaan.
</p>

<p>
One of these cities, Kirjath-Sepher, or <q>Book-town,</q>
is mentioned in the Old Testament. It was also
called Kirjath-Sannah, or <q>City of Instruction,</q>
doubtless from the school which was attached to its
library. The site of it is unfortunately lost; should
it ever be recovered, we may expect to find beneath
it literary treasures similar to those which the
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
mounds of Assyria and Babylonia have yielded.
Perhaps some day the papyri of Egypt will tell us
where exactly to look for it.
</p>

<p>
A reference to it has already been met with. In
the time of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, an Egyptian scribe composed
an ironical account of the adventures of a military
officer in Palestine. The officer in question was
called a Mohar, a word borrowed from the Babylonians,
in whose language it signified <q>an envoy.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Egyptian work is consequently usually known
as <hi rend='italic'>The Travels of a Mohar</hi>, and it gives us an interesting
picture of Canaan shortly before the Israelitish
Exodus. The author was clearly very proud of his
geographical knowledge, and has therefore introduced
the names of a large number of places. In one
passage he asks: <q>Hast thou not seen Kirjath-Anab
together with Beth-Sopher? Dost thou not know
Adullam and Zidiputha?</q> Dr. W. Max Müller, to
whom the correct reading of the passage is due,
points out that the scribe has interchanged the words
Kirjath, <q>city,</q> and Beth, <q>house,</q> and that he ought
to have written Beth-Anab and Kirjath-Sopher.
That he was acquainted, however, with the meaning
of the Canaanitish word Sopher (in Egyptian Thupar)
is shown by his adding to it the determinative of
<q>writing.</q> <foreign rend='italic'>Sopher</foreign>, in fact, means <q>scribe,</q> just as
<foreign rend='italic'>sepher</foreign> means <q>book,</q> and indicates the fact that
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
Kirjath-Sepher was not only a town of books, but of
book-writers as well. It will be remembered that
Beth-Anab, <q>the house of grapes,</q> in the abbreviated
form of Anab, is associated with Kirjath-Sepher in
the Old Testament (Josh. xi. 21; xv. 49, 50), just as
it is in the Egyptian papyrus.
</p>

<p>
In the Tel el-Amarna tablets we have a picture
of Canaan in the century which preceded the Exodus
of the Israelites out of Egypt. As we have seen, it
was at that time an Egyptian province. We can
thus understand why, in the tenth chapter of Genesis,
Canaan is made a brother of Mizraim, or Egypt. For
a while it obeyed the same sovereign and was administered
by the same laws; the natives of Canaan
held office in the court of the Pharaoh, and Egyptian
governors ruled in the Canaanitish cities. It was
not until after the death of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, of the nineteenth
dynasty, and about the very time when the
Israelites were escaping from their house of bondage,
that Canaan ceased to be an Egyptian dependency.
From that time forward it was politically and
geographically severed from the valley of the Nile,
and the geographer could never again couple it with
the land of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
When Khu-n-Aten was Pharaoh, the cities of
Canaan were numerous and wealthy. The people
were highly cultured, and excelled especially as
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
workers in gold and silver, as manufacturers of
porcelain and vari-coloured glass, and as weavers of
richly-dyed linen. Their merchants already traded
to distant parts of the known world. The governors
appointed by the Pharaoh were for the most part of
native origin, and at times a representative of the
old line of kings was left among them, though an
Egyptian prefect was often placed at his side. The
governors were controlled by the presence of
Egyptian garrisons, as well as by the visits of an
Egyptian <q>commissioner.</q> Their rivalries and
quarrels form the subject of many of the letters which
have been found at Tel el-Amarna, both sides appealing
to the Pharaoh for protection and help, and alike
protesting their loyalty to him. It seems to have
been the part of Egyptian policy to encourage these
quarrels, or at all events to hold an even balance
between the rival governors.
</p>

<p>
As long as the power of Egypt remained intact,
<emph>these quarrels</emph>, which sometimes <emph>resulted in open war</emph>,
offered no cause for alarm. Egyptian troops could
always be sent to the scene of disturbance before it
could become dangerous. But in the troublous days
of Khu-n-Aten's reign, when Egypt itself was restless
and inclined for revolt, the position of affairs was
changed. The Egyptian forces were needed at home,
and the Pharaoh was compelled to turn a deaf ear
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
to the piteous appeals that were made to him for
assistance. The enemies of Egyptian rule began to
multiply and grow powerful. In the south the
Khabiri or <q>Confederates</q> threatened the Egyptian
domination; in the north, Amorite rebels intrigued
with the Hittites and with the kings of Naharaim and
Babylonia, while in all parts of Palestine the Sute
or Bedouin were perpetually on the watch to take
advantage of the weakness of the government.
</p>

<p>
It was the vassal-king of Jerusalem, Ebed-tob by
name, who was especially menaced by the Khabiri.
In his letters he describes himself as unlike the other
governors, in that he had been appointed to his office
by the <q>arm</q> or <q>oracle</q> of <q>the Mighty King,</q> the
supreme deity of his city. It was not from his father
or his mother, consequently, that he had derived his
royal dignity. He was, in fact, a priest-king, like
his predecessor Melchizedek, to whom Abram had
paid tithes. Ebed-tob, however, was unable to make
head against his enemies the Khabiri. One by one
the towns which were included in the territory of
Jerusalem, from Keilah and Gath-Karmel to Rabbah,
fell into their hands; the Pharaoh was unable to send
him the help for which he so earnestly begged, and
we finally hear of his having fallen into the hands of
his Bedouin enemy, Labai, along with the cities of
which he was in charge. Labai was in alliance with
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
a certain Malchiel, who also writes letters to the
Egyptian monarch, as well as with Tagi of Gath and
the Khabiri. The latter seem to have given the
name of Hebron, <q>the Confederacy,</q> to the old city
of Kirjath-Arba.
</p>

<p>
Megiddo was the seat of an Egyptian governor,
like Gaza, near Shechem. The name of Shechem has
not been found in the Tel el-Amarna tablets, but a
reference is made to its <q>mountain,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Travels of
a Mohar</hi>. Either Mount Ebal or Mount Gerizim
must consequently have been already well known in
Egypt. Another Egyptian governor was in command
of Phœnicia. Gebal, north of Beyrût, was his
chief residence, but he had palaces also at Tyre and
Zemar, in the mountains of the interior. In one of
his letters he alludes to the wealth of Tyre, which
must therefore have been already famous.
</p>

<p>
Phœnicia and Palestine are alike included under
the name of <q>Canaan</q> in the cuneiform documents,
though in the hieroglyphic records they are called
Zahi and Khal (or Khar). North of Palestine came
<q>the land of the Amorites,</q> of which Ebed-Asherah
and his son, Aziru or Ezer, were governors, and to
the east of the Jordan was <q>the field of Bashan.</q>
The Egyptian supremacy was acknowledged as far
south as the frontier of Edom; the latter country
preserved its independence.
</p>

<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<p>
Such was the condition of Canaan when the cuneiform
correspondence of Tel el-Amarna comes suddenly
to an end. The death of Khu-n-Aten had
been the signal for a revolt against the faith which he
had endeavoured to impose upon Egypt, as well as
against the Asiatic influences by which he had been
surrounded. He left daughters only behind him.
One of them was married to a prince who, in order
to secure the throne, was forced to return to the old
religion of the country, and to call himself by the
name of Tutânkh-Amon. But his reign was short,
like those of one or two other relations and followers
of Khu-n-Aten who have left traces of themselves
upon the monuments. A rival king, Ai by name,
held possession of Egypt for a while, and after his
death Hor-m-hib, the Armais of Manetho, ruled once
more at Thebes over a united Egypt, and the worship
of the solar disk was at end.
</p>

<p>
But the ruins of Tel el-Amarna show that the
restoration of the old creed and the overthrow of
Khu-n-Aten's adherents had not been without a
struggle. Most of the tombs in the cliffs and sandhills
which surround the old city have been unfinished:
the followers of the new cult for whom
they were intended have never been allowed to
occupy them. The royal sepulchre itself, as we
have seen, is in an equally unfinished condition, and
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
the sarcophagus in which the body of the king rested
was violated soon after his mummy had been placed
in it. Indeed, it had never been deposited in the
niche that had been cut to receive it; its shattered
fragments were discovered far away on the floor of
the great columned hall. The capital of the <q>heretic
king</q> was destroyed by its enemies soon after his
death, and never inhabited again. The ruins of its
palace and houses were full of broken statues and
other objects which their owners had no time to
carry away. The city lasted only for about thirty
years, and the sands of the desert then began to
close over its fallen greatness. How sudden and
complete must have been its overthrow is proved by
the cuneiform tablets; not only were these imperial
archives not carried elsewhere, the correspondence
contained in them breaks off suddenly with a half-told
tale of disaster and dismay. The Asiatic empire
of Egypt is falling to pieces, its enemies are enclosing
it on every side; the Hittites have robbed it of its
northern provinces, and revolt is shaking it from
within. The governors and vassals of the Pharaoh
send more and more urgent requests for instant aid:
<q>If troops come this year, then there will remain
both provinces and governors to the king, my lord;
but if no troops come, no provinces or governors
will remain.</q> But no answer was returned to these
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
pressing appeals, and the sudden cessation of the
correspondence under the ruins of the Egyptian
foreign office itself gives us the reason why.
</p>

<p>
One of the first acts of Hor-m-hib after the settlement
of affairs at home was to chastise the Asiatics,
who had doubtless taken advantage of the momentary
weakness of Egypt. With the death of Hor-m-hib,
after a reign of five years,<note place='foot'>This is the length of the reign as given by Manetho, and with
this agree all the dated monuments of Hor-m-hib, with the exception
of a fragment in the British Museum (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian Inscriptions</hi>, 5624),
which has been supposed to refer to his seventh and twenty-first years.
But the king to whom these dates refer is uncertain, and Dr. Birch
may be right in considering that Amenôphis is meant.</note> the eighteenth dynasty
came to an end. Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, the founder of the nineteenth
dynasty, introduced a new type of royal name,
and also, as we learn from the monuments, a new type
of royal face. After a short reign of two years, he
was succeeded by his son, Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, in whose name we
have an evidence that the proscribed worship of the
god Set&mdash;the god of the Delta&mdash;was again taken
under royal patronage. It was an indication that the
new dynasty traced its descent from northern Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> once more led the Egyptian armies to
victory in Asia. With the spoils of conquest temples
were built and decorated, and the names of conquered
nations engraved upon their walls. One of
these temples was at Abydos, the most beautiful of
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
all those which have been left to us in Egypt. But
Seti's fame as a builder was far eclipsed by that of
his son and successor, Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, and even the
temples which he had raised at Abydos and Qurnah
were completed, and to a certain extent appropriated,
by his better-known son.
</p>

<p>
We are told in the Book of Exodus that two of
the <q>treasure cities</q> which the Israelites built for the
Pharaoh of the Oppression were <q>Pithom and
Raamses.</q> The discovery of Pithom was, as we
have already seen, the inaugural work of the Egypt
Exploration Fund. The discovery, as has been
already stated, was made by Dr. Naville, who was
led to the site by certain monuments of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>,
which had been found there by the French engineers
of M. de Lesseps. These monuments consisted of a
great tablet and monolith of red granite, two
sphinxes of exquisitely polished black granite, and
a broken shrine of red sandstone which had been
transported to Ismailîyeh, where they formed the
chief ornament of the little public garden. As they
all showed that Tum, the setting sun, was the
supreme deity of the place from which they had
come, Dr. Naville concluded that it would prove to
be Pi-Tum, <q>the abode of Tum,</q> the Pithom of
Scripture, and not the companion city of Raamses, as
Lepsius had believed.
</p>

<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>

<p>
The mounds from which the monuments had
been disinterred are about twelve miles to the west
of Ismailîyeh, and are called Tel el-Maskhuteh, <q>the
Mound of the Image.</q> In the last century, however,
they were known as Abu Kêshêd, and were famous
for a half-buried monolith of granite representing
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> seated between Tum and Râ, the hieroglyphic
inscription on the back of which has been
published by Sir Gardner Wilkinson. The canal
made by the Pharaohs for uniting the Nile with the
Red Sea, and afterwards cleared of the sand that
choked it by Darius, by Trajan, and by the Arab
conqueror 'Amru, skirted the southern side of the
mounds. At present the modern Freshwater Canal
runs along their northern edge, to the north of which
again is the line of the railway from Cairo to Suez.
The fortifications erected by Arabi, however, hide the
site of the old city from the traveller in the train.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Naville's excavations proved him to have
been right in identifying Tel el-Maskhuteh with
Pithom. The inscriptions he found there showed
that its ancient name was Pi-Tum, and that it stood
in the district of Thukut, the Succoth of the Old
Testament. The name of this district was already
known from papyri of the age of the nineteenth
dynasty, and Dr. Brugsch had pointed out its identity
with the Biblical Succoth.
</p>

<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>

<p>
But the discovery of the ancient name was not
the only result of the explorer's work. It turned out
that the city had been built by Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, and that
it contained a number of large brick buildings which
seem to have been intended for magazines. Here,
then, at last was a proof that the Egyptologists
were correct in making Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> the Pharaoh of
the Oppression.
</p>

<p>
The site of Raamses or Ramses, the companion
city of Pithom, has still to be discovered. But it
cannot be far distant from Tel el-Maskhuteh, and,
like the latter, must have been in that land of Goshen
in which the Israelites were settled. The discoveries
which enabled Dr. Naville to determine the boundaries
of the land of Goshen and to fix the site of its
ancient capital have already been described. The site
of Zoan, the modern Sân, had long been known, and
the excavations, first of Mariette Pasha and then of
Professor Flinders Petrie, have laid bare the foundations
of its temple and brought to light the monuments
of the kings who enriched and adorned it.
Built originally in the age of the Old Empire, it was
restored by the Hyksos conquerors of Egypt, and
became under them a centre of influence and power.
</p>

<p>
Goshen, Zoan and Pithom, the sites around which
the early history of Israel gathered, have thus been
brought to light. The disputes which have raged
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
about them are at last ended. Here and there a
persistent sceptic, who has been reared in the traditions
of the past, may still express doubts concerning
the discoveries of recent years, but for the Egyptologist
and the archæologist the question has been
finally settled. We can visit <q>the field of Zoan</q> and
explore the mounds of Pithom with no misgivings as
to their identity. When the train carries us from
Ismailîyeh to Cairo, we may feel assured that we are
passing through the district in which Jacob and his
family were settled, and where the kinsfolk of Moses
had their homes. The Egypt of the patriarchs and
the Exodus was an Egypt narrow in compass and
easily traversed in these days of steam; it represented
the western part of the Delta, more especially
the strip of cultivable land which stretches along the
banks of the Freshwater Canal from Zagazig to
Ismailîyeh: that is all. The eastern and northern
Delta, Upper Egypt&mdash;even the district in which Cairo
now stands&mdash;lay outside it. The history which attaches
itself to them is not the history of the early
Israelites.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Exodus And The Hebrew Settlement
In Canaan.</head>

<p>
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> was the last of the conquering Pharaohs
of native Egyptian history. The Asiatic empire of
Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> was in some measure restored by the
victories of his father and himself. The cities of
Palestine yielded him an unwilling obedience. Gaza,
and the other towns in what was afterwards the
territory of the Philistines, were garrisoned by
Egyptian troops, and on the walls of the Ramesseum
were depicted his conquest of Shalem or Jerusalem,
Merom, Beth-Anath, and other Canaanite states, in
his eighth year. Egyptian armies again marched
northward into Syria along the highroad that led
past the Phœnician cities, and on the banks of the
Nahr el-Kelb, or Dog's River, near Beyrût, the
Pharaoh erected a tablet in commemoration of his
successes. On the eastern side of the Jordan also
Egyptian authority once more prevailed. In front
of the northern pylon of the temple of Luxor, Ramses
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
erected six colossal figures of himself, and on their
recently-uncovered bases are inscribed the names of
the various nations he claimed to have subdued.
Among them we find, for the first time in the
Egyptian records, the name of Moab, following
immediately upon that of Assar, the Asshurim of
Genesis xxv. 3. That the insertion of the name was
not an idle boast we learn from a discovery lately
made by Dr. Schumacher. On the eastern side of
the Jordan, but at no great distance from the Lake
of Tiberias, is a monolith called the <q>Stone of Job.</q>
On this the German explorer has found Egyptian
sculptures and hieroglyphs. Above the figure of the
Pharaoh are the cartouches of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, and opposite
the king, on the left, a local deity is represented with
a full face and the crown of Osiris, over whom is
written the name of Akna-zapn, or <q>Yakin of the
North.</q> The monument is an evidence of a permanent
occupation of the country by the Egyptians,
as the name and figure of the god indicate that it
was erected, not by the Egyptians themselves, but
by the Egyptianised natives of the land.
</p>

<p>
Along the Syrian coast Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> had already carried
his arms. His campaigns were followed by those of
his son. Arvad, the shores of the Gulf of Antioch,
and even Cilicia, are enumerated among the conquests
of the Pharaoh. He even claims to have
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
defeated the armies of Assyria, of Matena or Mitanni,
the Aram-Naharaim of Scripture, and of Singar in
Mesopotamia. At Luxor, on the western walls of
the newly excavated court, we hear of his having
been at Tunip (now Tennib), <q>in the land of Naharaim,</q>
of his capture of a fortress of the Kati in the
same district, and of how <q>the Pharaoh</q> had taken
a city in <q>the land of Satuna.</q> Satuna was one of
those countries in the far north whose name is never
mentioned elsewhere in the Egyptian texts.
</p>

<p>
The Syrian conquests, however, could never have
been long in the Pharaoh's possession. Between
them and Palestine lay the southern outposts of the
Hittite race. In the troublous times which followed
the death of Khu-n-Aten, the Hittites had overrun
<q>the land of the Amorites</q> to the north of Canaan,
and fixed their southern capital in the holy city of
Kadesh, on the Orontes. It was a stronghold against
which the forces of Ramses were hurled in vain.
For twenty years did the struggle continue between
the Pharaoh of Egypt and <q>the great king of the
Hittites,</q> and at last, exhausted by the long conflict,
in which neither party had gained the advantage,
the two enemies agreed upon peace. A treaty was
signed on the twenty-first of the month Tybi, in
the twenty-first year of the reign of Ramses (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
1327), <q>in the city of Ramses,</q> to which the Hittite
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
ambassadors had come. Ramses, on the one side,
and Khita-sir, the son of Mul-sir, the Hittite prince,
on the other, bound themselves in it to eternal friendship
and alliance. In case of war they were to send
troops to one another's help, and they agreed to put
to death any criminals who might fly from the one
country to the other. Political offenders, however,
who had taken refuge in the territory of one or
other of the two contracting parties, were not to be
injured. It was of course the Canaanitish subjects
of the Pharaoh, who adjoined the Hittite kingdom,
that were principally affected by these stipulations.
It was further determined that on no pretext whatever
should any change be made in the boundaries
of the two monarchies. The treaty was placed under
the protection of the deities of Egypt and the
Hittites, and a Hittite copy of it was engraved on
a silver plate. The agreement was cemented by the
marriage of Ramses to a daughter of the Hittite
king, who thereupon assumed an Egyptian name.
</p>

<p>
Northern Syria was thus formally conceded to
the powerful conquerors who had descended from
the mountains of Kappadokia, while Palestine remained
under Egyptian dominion. But it was not
destined to do so long. Ramses was succeeded by
Meneptah, the fourteenth of his many sons, who had
reigned only four years when the very existence of
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
his kingdom was threatened by a formidable invasion
from the west and north. <q>The peoples of the north</q>
swarmed out of their coasts and islands, and a great
fleet descended upon Egypt, in conjunction with the
Libyans and Maxyes of northern Africa. Aqaiush
or Achæans, Shardana or Sardinians, Tursha or
Tyrsenians appear among them, as well as Leku
from Asia Minor, and Zakkur, who a little later
are the colleagues and brethren of the Philistines.
Part of the Delta was overrun and devastated before
the Pharaoh could make head against his foes. But a
decisive battle was at length fought at Pa-Alu-sheps,
not far from Heliopolis, which ended in the complete
overthrow of the invading hordes. Egypt was
saved from the danger which had threatened it, but
it seems never to have recovered from the shock.
The power of the government was weakened in
the valley of the Nile itself, and one by one the
foreign conquests passed out of its grasp. The
sceptre of Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, who followed Meneptah, seems
to have dropped into the hands of a usurper, Amon-messu
by name: the history of the period is, however,
involved in obscurity, and all that is certain is
that the empire of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> was lost, and that
Egypt itself fell into a state of decadence. With
Si-Ptah the nineteenth dynasty came to an inglorious
end.
</p>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<p>
Its fall was the signal for internal confusion and
civil war. A Syrian foreigner, Arisu by name,
possessed himself of the throne of the Pharaohs,
and Egypt for a while was compelled to submit
to Canaanitish rule. Its leading nobles were in
banishment, its gods were deprived of their customary
offerings, and famine was added to the horrors of
war. A deliverer came in the person of Set-nekht,
the founder of the twentieth dynasty. He drove
the stranger out the country, and restored it again
to peace and prosperity. Hardly had his task been
completed when he died, and was succeeded by his
son, Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Under him a transient gleam of
victory and conquest visited once more the valley
of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
It was well for Egypt that she possessed an
energetic general and king. The same hordes which
had threatened her in the reign of Meneptah now
again attacked her with increased numbers and
greater chances of success. In the fifth year of
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, the fair-skinned tribes of the western
desert poured into the Delta. The Maxyes, under
their chieftains Mdidi, Mâshakanu, and Mâraiu, and
the Libyans, under Ur-mâr and Zut-mâr, met the
Pharaoh in battle at a place which ever afterwards
bore a name commemorative of their defeat. The
victory of the Egyptians was, in fact, decisive. As
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
many as 12,535 slain were counted on the field of
battle, and captives and spoil innumerable fell into
the hands of the victors.
</p>

<p>
But Ramses was allowed only a short breathing-space.
Three years after the Libyan invasion, and
doubtless in connection with it, came a still more
formidable invasion on the part of the barbarians
of the north. This time they came partly by land,
partly by sea. Vast hordes of them had marched
out of Asia Minor, overrunning the kingdoms of
the Hittites, of Naharaim, of Carchemish, and of
Arvad, and carrying with them adventurers and recruits
from the countries through which they passed.
First they pitched their camp in <q>the land of the
Amorites,</q> and then marched southward towards the
frontiers of Egypt. The place of the Aqaiush was
taken by the Daanau or Danaans, but the Zakkur
again formed part of the invading host, this time
accompanied by Pulsata or Philistines, and Shakalsh
or Siculians. By the side of the land army moved
a fleet of ships, and fleet and army arrived together
at the mouths of the Nile. The cities in the extreme
south of Palestine, once occupied by Egyptian
garrisons, were captured by the Philistines, and
became henceforward their assured possession.
</p>

<p>
But the main body of the invaders were not so
fortunate. The Egyptian forces were ready to
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
receive them, and their ships had scarcely entered
the mouth of the Nile before they were attacked
by the Egyptian fleet. The battle ended in the
complete annihilation of the attacking host. A
picture of it is sculptured on the walls of Medînet
Habu at Thebes, the temple-palace which Ramses
built to commemorate his victories, and we can
there study the ships of the European barbarians
and the features and dress of the barbarians themselves.
In the expressive words of the Egyptian
scribe, <q>they never reaped a harvest any more.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ramses, however, was even now not left at rest.
Three years later the Maxyes again assailed Egypt
under Mashashal, the son of Kapur, but once more
unsuccessfully. Cattle, horses, asses, chariots and
weapons of war in large quantities fell into the hands
of the Egyptians, as well as 2052 captives, while
2175 men were slain. From this time forward Egypt
was secure from attack on its western border.
</p>

<p>
Freed from the necessity of defending his own
territories, Ramses now carried the war into Asia.
What in later days was the land of Judah was
overrun by his forces; Gaza and the districts round
Hebron and Salem or Jerusalem were occupied, and
the name of the Dead Sea appears on the walls
of Medînet Habu for the first time in Egyptian
history. The Egyptian army even crossed to the
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
eastern side of the Jordan and captured the Moabite
capital.
</p>

<p>
Another campaign led it along the Phœnician
coast into northern Syria. Hamath was taken, and
Ramses seems to have penetrated as far as the slopes
of the Taurus. He even claims to have defeated
the people of Mitanni or Aram-Naharaim on the
eastern bank of the Euphrates. The kings of the
Hittites and the Amorites, like the chiefs of the
Zakkur and the Philistines, were already prisoners
in his hands.
</p>

<p>
But the northern campaigns of Ramses were intended
to strike terror rather than to re-establish
the Asiatic empire of Egypt. No attempt was made
to hold the cities and districts which had been overrun.
Though a temple was erected to Amon on
the frontiers of the later Judæa, even Gaza was
given up, and the fortress which had so long
defended the road from Canaan into Egypt was
allowed to pass into Philistine hands. It was the
same with the campaign which the Pharaoh conducted
at a later date against the <q>Shasu</q> or
Bedouin of Edom. For the first time an Egyptian
army succeeded in making its way into the fastnesses
of Mount Seir, slaying the warriors of Edom,
and plundering their <q>tents.</q> The Edomite chief
himself was made a prisoner. The expedition
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
had the effect of protecting the Egyptian mining
establishments in the Sinaitic peninsula as well as
the maritime trade with southern Arabia. Large
quantities of malachite were brought year by year
from the Egyptian province of Mafka or Sinai, and
the merchant-vessels of Ramses coasted along the
Red Sea, bringing back with them the precious spices
of Yemen and Hadhramaut.
</p>

<p>
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> died after a reign of more than thirty-two
years, and the military renown of Egypt expired
with him. His exact date is still a matter of doubt,
but his accession must have fallen about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1200.
The date is important, not only because it closes
the history of Egypt as a conquering power, but
also as it marks a great era of migration among
the northern populations of the Mediterranean, as
well as the permanent settlement of the Philistines
in Palestine. It was, moreover, the period to which
the Israelitish invasion of Canaan must belong.
</p>

<p>
When Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> overran the southern portion
of Palestine, and built the temple of the Theban
god at the spot now known as Khurbet Kan'an,
not far from Hebron, the Israelites could not as yet
have entered the Promised Land. There is no reference
to the Egyptians in the Pentateuch, and there
is no reference to the Israelites in the hieroglyphic
texts of Medînet Habu. Hebron, Migdal, Karmel
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
of Judah, Ir-Shemesh and Hadashah, all alike fell
into the hands of the Egyptian invaders, but neither
in the Egyptian nor in the Hebrew records is there
any allusion to a struggle between Egypt and Israel.
When Joshua entered Canaan all these cities belonged
to the Canaanites, and when Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>
attacked them this was also the case. The Palestinian
campaign of Ramses must have prepared the
way for the Israelitish conquest; it could not have
followed after it.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, <q>the five lords of the Philistines</q> seem
to have already been settled in the extreme south
when the Israelitish invasion took place (Josh. xiii. 3).
Yet it also seems clear from the Egyptian monuments
that the settlement was not fully completed
until after the Asiatic campaigns of the Pharaoh had
occurred. The Philistines indeed formed part of
the great invading host which poured through Syria
and assailed Egypt in the early part of his reign,
but Gaza was one of his conquests, and its possession
enabled him to march into Canaan. Before Gaza
could become a Philistine city it was needful that
its Egyptian garrison should be withdrawn. Professor
Prášek believes that the Philistine occupation
of southern Canaan took place in the year <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1209,
since the Roman historian Justin tells us that in
this year a king of Ashkelon stormed the city of
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
Sidon, and that the Sidonians fled to a neighbouring
part of the coast, and there founded Tyre. However
this may be, the Philistine settlement in Canaan
must be ascribed to the age of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, and it
was already with the Philistines that the Israelites
came into conflict under almost the earliest of their
judges.
</p>

<p>
But the date of the Israelitish conquest of Canaan
is closely bound up with that of the Exodus out of
Egypt. It is true that when we are told of the
forty years' wandering in the desert, the word <q>forty</q>
is used, as it is elsewhere in the Old Testament, as
well as upon the Moabite Stone, to denote an indeterminate
period of time. It was a period during
which the greater part of the generation that had
left Egypt had time to die. Joshua and Caleb
indeed remained, and Othniel, the brother of Caleb,
lived to deliver Israel from the king of Aram-Naharaim,
and to be the first of the judges. But otherwise
it was a new generation which was led to conquest
by Joshua.
</p>

<p>
If Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> was the Pharaoh of the Oppression,
the Pharaoh of the Exodus must have been one of his
immediate successors. Egyptologists have hesitated
between Meneptah, Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, and Si-Ptah. There is
much to be said in favour of each. None of them
reigned long, and after the death of Meneptah the
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
sceptre fell into feeble hands, and the Egyptian
monarchy went rapidly to decay.
</p>

<p>
Native tradition, as reported by the historian
Manetho, made Meneptah the Pharaoh under whom
the children of Israel escaped from their house of
bondage. Amenôphis or Meneptah, it was said,
desired to see the gods. He was accordingly instructed
by the seer Amenôphis, the son of Pa-apis,
to clear the land of the leprous and impure. This
he did, and 80,000 persons were collected from all
parts of Egypt, and were then separated from the
other inhabitants of the country and compelled to
work in the quarries of Tûra, on the eastern side
of the Nile. Among them there happened to be
some priests, one of whom was Osarsiph, a priest
of On, and the sacrilegious act of laying hands on
them was destined to be avenged by the gods. The
seer prophesied that the impure lepers would find
allies, and with their help would govern Egypt for
thirteen years, when a saviour should arise in the
person of Amenôphis himself. Not daring to tell
the king of this prediction, he put it in writing and
then took away his own life. After a time the
workers in the quarries were removed to Avaris, the
deserted fortress of the Hyksos, on the Asiatic
frontier of the Egyptian kingdom. Here they rose in
rebellion under Osarsiph, who organised them into a
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
community, and gave them new laws, forbidding them
to revere the sacred animals, and ordering them to
rebuild the walls of Avaris. He also sent to the
descendants of the Hyksos at Jerusalem, begging
for their assistance. A force of 200,000 men was
accordingly despatched to Avaris, and the invasion of
Egypt decided on. Amenôphis retired into Ethiopia
without striking a blow, carrying with him his son
Sethos, who was also called Ramesses after his
grandfather, as well as the sacred bull Apis, and
other holy animals. The images of the gods were
concealed, lest they should be profaned by the invaders.
Amenôphis remained in Ethiopia for thirteen
years, while Osarsiph, who had taken the name
of Moses, together with his allies from Jerusalem,
committed innumerable atrocities. At last, however,
Amenôphis and his son Sethos returned, each at the
head of an army; the enemy were defeated and overthrown,
and finally pursued to the borders of Syria.
</p>

<p>
The tradition is a curious mixture of fact and
legend. Osarsiph is but an Egyptianised form of
Joseph, the first syllable of which has been explained
as representing the god of Israel (as in Ps. lxxxi. 5),
and has accordingly been identified with Osar or
Osiris. The ancient Egyptian habit of regarding the
foreigner as impure has been interpreted to mean
that the followers of Osarsiph were lepers. The
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
Exodus of the Israelites has been confounded with
the invasion of the northern barbarians in the reign
of Meneptah, as well as with the troublous period
that saw the fall of the nineteenth dynasty when the
throne of Egypt was seized by the Syrian Arisu. And,
lastly, the hated Hyksos have been introduced into
the story; their fortress Avaris is made the rallying-place
of the revolted lepers, and it is through the help
they send from Jerusalem that the rule of Osarsiph
or Moses is established in the valley of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
An interesting commentary on the legend has
been furnished by a papyrus lately acquired by M.
Golénischeff, and dating from the age of Thothmes
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> On the last page is a sort of Messianic prophecy,
the hero of which has the name of Ameni, a shortened
form of Amenôphis. <q>A king,</q> it says, <q>will come
from the south, Ameni the truth-declaring by name.
He will be the son of a woman of Nubia, and will be
born in.... He will assume the crown of Upper
Egypt, and will lift up the red crown of Lower Egypt.
He will unite the double crown.... The people of
the age of the son of man (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>) will rejoice and
establish his name for all eternity. They will be far
from evil, and the wicked will humble their mouths
for fear of him. The Asiatics (Âmu) will fall before
his blows, and the Libyans before his flame. The
wicked will wait on his judgments, the rebels on his
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
power. The royal serpent on his brow will pacify
the revolted. A wall shall be built, even that of the
prince, so that the Asiatics may no more enter into
Egypt.</q> In this Ameni we should probably see the
Amenôphis of the Manethonian story.
</p>

<p>
Against the identification of Meneptah with the
Pharaoh of the Exodus it has, however, been urged
that he seems on the whole to have been a successful
prince. His kingdom passed safely through the
shock of the Libyan and northern invasions, and
notices which have survived to us show that, at all
events in the earlier part of his reign, Gaza and the
neighbouring towns still acknowledged his authority.
At Zaru, on the Asiatic frontier of Egypt, a young
scribe, Pa-ebpasa by name, was stationed, whose duty
it was to keep a record of all those who entered or
left the country by <q>the way of the Philistines.</q>
Some of his notes, made in the third year of
Meneptah, are entered on the back of his school copybook,
which is now in the British Museum. One of
them tells us that on the fifteenth of Pakhons Baal&mdash; ... the
son of Zippor of Gaza, passed through with a
letter to Baal-marom(?)-ga[b]u, the prince of Tyre;
another that Thoth, the son of Zakarumu, and the
policeman Duthau, the son of Shem-baal, as well as
Sutekh-mes, the son of Epher-dagal, had come from
Gaza with a message to the king.
</p>

<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>

<p>
A curious despatch, dated in Meneptah's eighth
year, goes to show that at that time the kinsfolk of
the Israelites still had liberty to pass from the desert
into the land of Goshen and there find pasturage for
their flocks. One of his officials informs him that
certain Shasu or Bedouin from Edom had been
allowed to pass the Khetam or fortress of Meneptah
Hotep-hima in the district of Succoth, and make
their way to the lakes of the city of Pithom, in
the district of Succoth, <q>in order to feed themselves
and their herds on the possessions of Pharaoh,
who is there a beneficent sun for all peoples.</q>
The document may be interpreted in two ways. It
may be taken as a proof that the Israelites had not
yet fled from Egypt, and that there was consequently
as yet no restraint placed by the Egyptians upon
the entrance of the Asiatic nomads into their country,
or it may be regarded as implying that the land of
Goshen was already deserted, so that there was
abundance of room for both shepherds and flocks.
On behalf of this view a passage may be quoted from
the great inscription of Meneptah at Karnak, in
which we read that <q>the country around Pa-Bailos
(the modern Belbeis) was not cultivated, but left as
pasture for cattle because of the strangers. It was
abandoned since the time of the ancestors.</q> More
probably, however, this means that the land in
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
question was not inhabited by Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign>, but
given over to the Hebrew shepherds and the <q>mixed
multitude</q> of their Bedouin kinsmen.
</p>

<p>
A more serious objection to making Meneptah
the Pharaoh of the Exodus is the fact that his son
Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> was already acknowledged as heir to the
throne during his father's lifetime. The <q>tale of the
two brothers,</q> to which we have already had to refer,
was dedicated to him while he was still crown-prince.
Indeed, it would even appear that he was associated
with his father on the throne, since the cartouches of
Meneptah and Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> are found side by side in the
rock-temple of Surarîyeh. It would seem, therefore,
that the first-born of the Pharaoh, who was destroyed
on the night of the Passover, could not have been a
son of Meneptah&mdash;at all events, if his heir and future
successor were his first-born son. That Meneptah
should have been buried in one of the royal tombs
of Bibân el-Molûk at Thebes, and received divine
honours after his death, is of less consequence. As
has often been remarked, no mention is made in
the narrative of the Exodus that the Pharaoh
himself was drowned, and though Meneptah's
tomb (No. 8) is unfinished, the cult that was
paid to his memory indicates that his mummy
was deposited in it. It was plundered centuries
ago, and the numerous Greek inscriptions on its
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
walls make it clear that it was open to visitors in
the Roman age.
</p>

<p>
Professor Maspero has suggested that the Pharaoh
of the Bible was Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> We know that Seti must
have been a weak prince, and that his rule was disputed.
A usurper, Amon-messu by name, seized the
crown either during his lifetime or at his death, and
governed at Thebes, while the authority of the lawful
line of princes was still acknowledged in the north.
We also know that he must have died suddenly, for
his tomb at Thebes (No. 15), though begun magnificently,
was never finished. Its galleries and halls
were hewn out of the rock, but never adorned with
sculptures and paintings, and, except at the entrance,
we have merely outline sketches, which were never
filled in. His cartouches, however, are found in
another tomb, not far off (No. 13), and after his death
worship was paid to him and his wife.
</p>

<p>
A despatch, written during his reign, relates to
the escape of two fugitives who had travelled along
the very road which the Israelites attempted to take.
The scribe tells us that he set out in pursuit of them
from the royal city of Ramses on the evening of the
9th of Epiphi, and had arrived at the Khetam or
fortress of Succoth the following day. Two days later
he reached another Khetam, and there learned that the
slaves were already safe in the desert, having passed
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
the lines of fortification to the north of the Migdol of
King Seti. The account is an interesting illustration
of the flight, on a far larger scale, that must have
taken place about the same time. The geography of
the despatch is in close harmony with that of the
Book of Exodus, and bears witness to the contemporaneousness
of the latter with the events it professes
to record. It is a geography which ceased to
be exact after the age of the nineteenth dynasty.
</p>

<p>
It is thus possible that Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, instead of Meneptah,
is the Pharaoh whose host perished in the waves
of the Red Sea. But there is yet another claimant
in Si-Ptah, with whom the nineteenth dynasty came
to an end. Dr. Kellogg has argued ably on behalf
of him, and it is possible that the views of this
scholar are correct. Si-Ptah's right to the throne was
derived from his wife, Ta-user, and he reigned at least
six years. That he followed Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> has long been
admitted, on the authority of Manetho, though
doubts have been cast on it in consequence of a statement
of Champollion that he found the name of Seti
written over that of Si-Ptah in the tomb of the latter
at Bibân el-Molûk (No. 14). All doubts, however,
are now set at rest by an inscription I copied at
Wadi Halfa two years ago, in which the writer, Hora,
the son of Kam, declares that he had formerly
belonged to the palace of Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, and had engraved
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
the inscription in the third year of Si-Ptah. In
another inscription in the same place, dated also in
Si-Ptah's reign, the author states that he had been
an ambassador to the land of Khal or Syria. Intercourse
with Asia was therefore still maintained.
</p>

<p>
Si-Ptah's tomb at Thebes was usurped by Setnekht,
the founder of the twentieth dynasty. It is
even doubtful whether the king for whom it was
made was ever buried in it. In the second sepulchral
hall the lid of his sarcophagus was discovered, but of
the sarcophagus itself there was no trace. Perhaps
it had been appropriated by Set-nekht. At any rate,
those who believe that the Pharaoh of the Exodus
perished in the Red Sea will find in Si-Ptah a better
representative of him than in Meneptah or Seti.
And the period of anarchy which followed upon his
death may be regarded as the natural sequel of the
disasters that befel Egypt before the children of
Israel were permitted to go.
</p>

<p>
However this may be, the question of the date of
the Exodus is reduced to narrow limits. The three
successors of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> reigned altogether but a
short time. Manetho gives seven years only to Si-Ptah,
five years to Amon-messu, and we know from
the monuments that Meneptah and Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> can have
reigned but a very few years. Thirty or forty years
at most will have covered the period that elapsed
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
between the death of the great Ramses and the
downfall of his dynasty. Then came a few years of
confusion and anarchy, followed by the reign of Setnekht.
If we place the accession of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1230, we cannot be far wrong.
</p>

<p>
When that happened, the Israelites were hidden
out of the sight of the great nations of the world
among the solitudes of the desert. They were pitching
their tents on the frontiers of Mount Seir, in the
near neighbourhood of their kinsmen in Edom and
Midian. There, at Sinai and Kadesh-barnea, they
were receiving a code of laws, and being fitted to
become a nation and the conquerors of Canaan.
Were they included among the Shasu of Mount Seir
whose overthrow is commemorated by Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>?
</p>

<p>
For an answer we must turn to the twenty-first
chapter of the Book of Numbers. There we read
how it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord:
<q>Waheb in Suphah and the brooks of Arnon, and the
stream of the brook that goeth down to the dwelling
of Ar, and lieth upon the border of Moab.</q> Of the
war against the Amorites on the banks of the Arnon
we know something, but the Old Testament has preserved
no record of the other war, which had its scene
in Suphah. Where Suphah was we know from the
opening of the Book of Deuteronomy, which tells us
that the words of Moses were addressed to the people
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
<q>in the plain over against Suph.</q> Suph, in fact, was
the district which gave its name to the <foreign rend='italic'>yâm Sûph</foreign> or
<q>Sea of Suph,</q> the Red Sea of the authorised version,
the modern Gulf of Akabah. Here were the Edomite
ports of Eloth and Ezion-geber, where Solomon built
his fleet of merchantmen (1 Kings ix. 26), and here
too was the region which faced <q>the plain</q> on the
southern side of Moab.
</p>

<p>
The barren ranges of Mount Seir run down southward
to Ezion-geber and Eloth, at the head of the
Gulf of Akabah. And it was just in the ranges of
Mount Seir that Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> tells us he smote the
Shasu and plundered their tents. When he made
this expedition, the Israelites were probably still encamped
on the borders of Edom. They had not
as yet entered Canaan when he marched through
the later Judæa, and crossed the Jordan into Moab,
and his campaign against the Shasu of the desert
did not take place many years later. At Medînet
Habu, the <q>chief of the Shasu</q> figures among his
prisoners by the side of the kings of the Hittites
and the Amorites.
</p>

<p>
Was <q>the war of the Lord</q> in Suphah waged
against the Pharaoh of Egypt? Chronology is in
favour of it, and if the enemies of the Israelites
were not the Egyptian army, it is hard to say who
else they could have been. We know from the
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
Pentateuch that they were not the people of Edom;
<q>meddle not with them,</q> the Israelites were enjoined;
the children of Esau were their <q>brethren,</q> and God
had <q>given Mount Seir unto Esau for a possession.</q>
</p>

<p>
But whether or not Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> and the tribes of
Israel ever came into actual conflict, it must have
been during his reign that the first Israelitish conquests
in Canaan were made. The settlement of
the twelve tribes in Palestine was coeval with the
final decay of the Egyptian monarchy.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Age Of The Israelitish Monarchies.</head>

<p>
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> was the last of the great Pharaohs in
whose veins ran native Egyptian blood. His successors
all bore the same name as himself, but they
possessed neither his energy nor his power to rule. He
had saved Egypt from further attack from without, and
it was well he had done so, for the feeble monarchs
of the twentieth dynasty would have been unable to
resist the foe. They ceased even to build or to erect
the monuments which testified to the prosperity of
the country and the progress of its art. The high-priests
of Amon gradually usurped their authority,
and a time came at length when the last of the Ramses
fled into exile in Ethiopia, and a new dynasty
governed in his stead. But the rule of the new monarchs
was hardly acknowledged beyond the Delta;
Thebes was practically independent under its priest-kings,
and though they acknowledged the authority
of the Tanite Pharaohs in name, they acted, in real
fact, as if they were independent sovereigns. One of
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
them, Ra-men-kheper, built fortresses not only at
Gebelên in the south, but also at El-Hîbeh in the north,
and thus blocked the river against the subjects of the
Tanite princes, as well as against invaders from the
south. At times, indeed, the Tanite Pharaohs of the
twenty-first dynasty exercised an actual sovereignty
over Upper Egypt, and Smendes, the first of them,
quarried stone at Dababîyeh, opposite Gebelên, with
which to repair the canal of Luxor; but, as a general
rule, so far as the south was concerned, they were
Pharaohs only in name. The rival dynasty of Theban
high-priests was at once more powerful and more king-like.
They it was who, in some moment of danger,
concealed the mummies of the great monarchs of the
eighteenth and nineteenth dynasties in the pit at Dêr
el-Bahâri, and whose own mummies were entombed
by the side of those of a Thothmes and a Ramses.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptian wife of Solomon was the daughter
of one of the last Pharaohs of the twenty-first
dynasty. She brought with her as a dowry the
Canaanitish city of Gezer. Gezer had been one of
the leading cities of Palestine in the days of the Tel
el-Amarna correspondence, and through all the years
of Israelitish conquest it had remained in Canaanitish
hands. It was a Pharaoh of Tanis, and not an
Israelite, into whose possession it was destined finally
to fall.
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<p>
The waning power of Solomon in Israel coincided
with the waning power of the twenty-first dynasty.
Long before the death of the Hebrew monarch, a new
dynasty was reigning over Egypt. Shishak, its
founder, was of Libyan origin. His immediate forefathers
had commanded the Libyan mercenaries in
the service of the Pharaoh, and inscriptions lately
discovered in the Oasis of El-Khargeh write the
name Shashaka. The Egyptians slightly changed
its pronunciation and made it Shashanq, but in the
Old Testament the true form is preserved.
</p>

<p>
Shishak brought new vigour into the decaying
monarchy of the Nile. The priest-kings of Thebes
went down before him, along with the effete Pharaohs
of Tanis. It may be that Solomon attempted to
assist his father-in-law; if he did so, the only result
was to bring trouble upon himself. His rebel subject
Jeroboam fled to Egypt, and found shelter and protection
in Shishak's court.
</p>

<p>
Shishak must have looked on with satisfaction
while the neighbouring empire of Israel fell to pieces,
until eventually the central power itself was shattered
in twain. The rebel he had so carefully nurtured at
his own court was the instrument which relieved him
of all further fear of danger on the side of Asia. So
far from being a menace to Egypt, Jerusalem now lay
at the mercy of the Egyptian armies, and in the fifth
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
year of Rehoboam, Shishak led his forces against it.
The strong walls Solomon had built were of no avail;
its temple and palace were plundered, and the golden
shields in its armoury were carried away. A record
of the campaign was engraved by the conqueror on
the southern wall of the temple of Amon at Karnak.
There we read how he had overthrown the Amu or
Asiatics, and the Fenkhu or people of Palestine, and
underneath are the cartouches, each with the head
of a captive above it, which contain the names of
the conquered places. At the outset come the names
of towns in the northern kingdom of Israel. But, as
Professor Maspero remarks, this does not prove that
they were actually among the conquests of Shishak.
If Jeroboam had begged his aid against Judah, and
thereby acknowledged himself the vassal of the
Pharaoh, it would have been a sufficient pretext for
inserting the names of his cities among the subject
states of Egypt. But it may be that the campaign
was directed quite as much against Israel as against
Judah, and that Judah suffered most, simply because
it had to bear the brunt of the attack.
</p>

<p>
In any case, the list of vanquished towns begins
first with Gaza, the possession of which was necessary
before the Egyptian army could force its way into
Palestine; then come Rabbith of Issachar, Taanach,
near Megiddo, Hapharaim and Beth-Horon, while
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
Mahanaim, on the eastern side of the Jordan, is also
included among them. But after this the list deals
exclusively with the towns and villages of Judah, and
of the Bedouin tribes in the desert to the south of it.
Thus we have Ajalon and Makkedah, Socho and
Keilah, Migdol and Beth-anoth. Then we read the
names of Azem and Arad, farther to the south, as
well as of the Hagaraim or <q>Enclosures</q> of Arad, and
Rabbith 'Aradai, <q>Arad the capital.</q> Next to Arad
comes the name of Yurahma, the Jerahme-el of the Old
Testament, the brother of Caleb the Kenizzite (1 Chron.
ii. 42) whose land was ravaged by David (1 Sam.
xxx. 29). But the larger portion of the list is made
up of the names of small villages and even Bedouin
encampments, or of such general terms as Hagra,
<q>enclosure,</q> Negebu, <q>the south,</q> 'Emeq, <q>the valley,</q>
Shebbaleth, <q>a torrent,</q> Abilim, <q>fields,</q> Ganat,
<q>garden,</q> Haideba, <q>a quarry,</q> and the Egyptian
Shodinau, <q>canals.</q><note place='foot'>See Maspero's exhaustive paper <q>The List of Sheshonq at
Karnak,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Transactions of the Victoria Institute</hi>,
xxvii. (1893-94).</note> Among them we look in vain
even for names like those of Gezer and Beer-sheba.
Jerusalem, too, is conspicuous by its absence, unless
we agree with Professor Maspero in seeing it in the
last name of the list (No. 133), of which only the first
syllable is preserved. Were it not for the record in
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
the First Book of Kings, we should never have known
that the campaign of Shishak had inflicted such
signal injury on the kingdom of Judah.
</p>

<p>
Champollion, indeed, the first discoverer of the
list and of its importance, believed that he had found
in it the name of the Jewish capital. The twenty-ninth
cartouche reads Yaud-hamelek, which he explained
as signifying <q>the kingdom of Judah,</q> while
Rosellini made it <q>the king of Judah.</q> But both
interpretations are impossible. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Melek</foreign>, it is true,
means <q>king</q> in Hebrew, but <q>king of Judah</q> would
have to be <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>melek-Yaudah</foreign>; <q>kingdom of Judah,</q> <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>malkûth-Yaudah</foreign>.
In the Semitic languages the genitive
must follow the noun that governs it.
</p>

<p>
Yaud-hamelek is the Hebrew Ye(h)ud ham-melech
<q>Jehud of the king.</q> Jehud was a town of Dan (Josh.
xix. 45), which Blau has identified with the modern
El-Yehudîyeh, near Jaffa, and the title attached to it
in the Egyptian list implies that it was an appanage
of the crown. The faces of the prisoners who surmount
the cartouches are worthy of attention. The
Egyptian artists were skilled delineators of the
human features, and an examination of their sculptures
and paintings has shown that they represented
the characteristics of their models with wonderful
truth and accuracy. For ethnological purposes
their portraits of foreign races are of considerable
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
importance. Now the prisoners of Shishak have the
features, not of the Jew, but of the Amorite. The
prisoners who served as models to the Egyptian
sculptors at Karnak must therefore have been of
Amorite descent. It is a proof that the Amorite
population in southern Palestine was still strong in
the days of Rehoboam and Shishak. The Jews
would have been predominant only in Jerusalem and
the larger cities and fortresses of the kingdom. Elsewhere
the older race survived with all its characteristic
features; the Israelitish conquest had never
rooted it out. Hence it is that it still lives and
flourishes in its ancient home. The traveller in the
country districts of Judah looks in vain for traces of
the Jewish race, but he may still see there the
Amorite just as he is depicted on the monuments of
Egypt. The Jews, in fact, were but the conquering
and dominant caste, and with the extinction of their
nationality came also in Judah the extinction of their
racial type. The few who remained were one by one
absorbed into the older population of the country.
</p>

<p>
Shishak died soon after his Jewish campaigns.
None of his successors seem to have possessed his
military capacity and energy. One of them, however,
Osorkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, appears to have made an expedition
against Palestine. Among the monuments disinterred
at Bubastis by Dr. Naville for the Egyptian
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
Exploration Fund are the inscribed blocks of stone
which formed the walls of the second hall of the
temple. This hall was restored by Osorkon, who
called it the <q>Festival Hall</q> of Amon, which was
dedicated on the day of Khoiak, in the twenty-second
year of the king's reign. On one of the
blocks the Pharaoh declares that <q>all countries, the
Upper and Lower Retennu, are hidden under his
feet.</q> The Upper Retennu denoted Palestine, the
Lower Retennu Northern Syria, and though the
boast was doubtless a vainglorious one, it must have
had some foundation in truth.
</p>

<p>
In the Second Book of Chronicles (xiv. 9-15) we
are told that when Asa was on the Jewish throne,
<q>there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian
with an host of a thousand thousand and three
hundred chariots.</q> The similarity between the names
Zerah and Osorkon has long been noticed, and the
reign of Osorkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> would coincide with that of Asa.
Dr. Naville, therefore, is probably right in believing
that some connection exists between the campaign
of Zerah and the boast of Osorkon. It is true that
the Chronicler calls Zerah an Ethiopian, and describes
his army as an Ethiopian host; but this
seems due to the fact that the next kings of Egypt
who interfered in the affairs of Palestine, So and
Tirhakah, were of Ethiopian descent. In the time
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
of Asa, at any rate, when the twenty-second dynasty
was ruling over Egypt, no Ethiopian army could
have entered Judah without the permission of the
Egyptian monarch. However, Dr. Naville draws
attention to the fact that Osorkon seems to have
had some special tie with Ethiopia. His great
festival at Bubastis was attended by natives of
Ethiopia, the Anti came with their gifts from <q>the
land of the negroes,</q> and are depicted like the priests
on the walls of the hall.
</p>

<p>
But troublous times were in store for Egypt.
The twenty-second dynasty came to an end, and
a period followed of confusion, civil war, and foreign
invasion. The kings of Ethiopia sailed down the
Nile and swept the country from Assuan to the sea.
Petty princes reigned as independent sovereigns in
the various cities of Egypt, and waged war one
against the other. Pi-ankhi the Ethiopian was
content with their momentary submission; he then
retired to his ancestral capital at Napata, midway
between Dongola and Khartûm, carrying with him
the spoils of the Nile. Another Ethiopian, Shabaka
or Sabako, the son of Kashet, made a more permanent
settlement in Egypt. He put to death the
nominal Pharaoh, Bak-n-ran-f or Bokkhoris, and
founded the twenty-fifth dynasty. Order was again
restored, the petty princes suppressed, and Egypt
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
as well as Ethiopia obeyed a single head. The roads
were cleared of brigands, the temples and walls of
the cities were rebuilt, and trade could again pass
freely up and down the Nile.
</p>

<p>
An Egyptian civilisation and an Egyptian religion
had been established in Ethiopia since the days of
the eighteenth dynasty. For some centuries, even
after they had become independent of Egypt, the
ruling classes boasted of the purity of their Egyptian
descent. But before the age of Sabako the Egyptian
element had been absorbed by the native population.
We have learned from a monument of the Assyrian
king, Esar-haddon, lately found at Sinjerli, in northern
Syria, that Sabako and his successors had all the
physical characteristics of the negro. But no sign of
this is allowed to appear on the Egyptian monuments.
With the contempt for the black race which still
distinguishes them, the Egyptians refused to acknowledge
that their Pharaohs could be of negro blood.
In the sculptures and paintings of the Nile, accordingly,
the kings of the Ethiopian dynasty are represented
with all the features of the Egyptian
race.
</p>

<p>
In spite, however, of all attempts to conceal the
fact, we now know that they were negroes in reality.
But they brought with them a vigour and a strength
of will that had long been wanting among the rulers
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
of Egypt. And it was not long before their Asiatic
neighbours found that a new and energetic power
had arisen on the banks of the Nile. Assyria was
now extending its empire throughout Western Asia,
and claiming to control the politics of Syria and
Palestine. The Syrian princes looked to Egypt for
help. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 720, Assyria and Egypt met face to
face for the first time. Sib'e, the Tartan, or commander-in-chief,
of the Egyptian armies, with Hanno
of Gaza and other Syrian allies, blocked the way
of the Assyrian invaders at Raphia, on the border of
Palestine. The victory was won by the Assyrian
Sargon. Hanno was captured, and Sib'e fled to the
Delta. But Sargon turned northward again, and did
not follow up his success. He was content with
receiving the tribute of Pharaoh (Pir'u) <q>king of
Egypt,</q> of Samsi, the queen of Arabia, and of Ithamar
the Sabæan.
</p>

<p>
In Sib'e we must see the So or Seve of the Old
Testament (2 Kings xvii. 4). He is there called
<q>king of Egypt,</q> but he was rather one of the subordinate
princes of the Delta, who acted as the
commander-in-chief of <q>Pharaoh.</q> Pharaoh, it would
seem, was still Bak-n-ran-f.
</p>

<p>
A few years later Sabako was established on the
throne. He reigned at least twelve years, and was
succeeded by his brother-in-law, Tirhakah, the Tarqû
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
of the Assyrian texts. Under him, Egypt once more
played a part in Jewish history.
</p>

<p>
It was trust in <q>Pharaoh, king of Egypt,</q> that made
Hezekiah revolt from Assyria after Sargon's death.
The result was the invasion of his kingdom by
Sennacherib in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 701. Tirhakah moved forward
to help his ally. But his march diverted the attention
of the Assyrian monarch only for a while. The
armies of Sennacherib and Tirhakah met at Eltekeh,
and Tirhakah the Pharaoh of Egypt was forced to
retire. Both claim a victory in their inscriptions.
Sennacherib tells us how <q>the kings of Egypt and
the bowmen, chariots, and horses of the king of
northern Arabia, had collected their innumerable
forces and gone to the aid</q> of Hezekiah and his
Philistine allies, and how in sight of Eltekeh, <q>in reliance
on Assur,</q> he had <q>fought with them and utterly
overthrown them.</q> <q>The charioteers and the sons of
the king of Egypt, together with the charioteers of
the king of northern Arabia,</q> he had <q>taken captive
in the battle.</q> Tirhakah, on the other hand, on a
statue now in the Gizeh Museum, declares that he
was the conqueror of the Bedouin, the Hittites, the
Arvadites, the Assyrians, and the people of Aram-Naharaim.
The battle, in fact, was a Kadmeian
victory. Tirhakah was so far defeated that he was
forced to retreat to his own dominions, while
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
Sennacherib's victory was not decisive enough to allow
him to pursue it. He contented himself with marching
back into Judah, burning and plundering its
towns and villages, and carrying their inhabitants
into captivity. Then came the catastrophe which
destroyed the larger part of his army and obliged
him to return ignominiously to his own capital. The
spoils and captives of Judah were the only fruits of
his campaign. His rebellious vassal went unpunished,
and the strong fortress of Jerusalem was saved from
the Assyrian. Though Sennacherib made many
military expeditions during the remaining twenty
years of his reign, he never came again to the south
of Palestine.
</p>

<p>
Egypt lay sheltered from invasion behind Jerusalem.
But with the death of Sennacherib there
came a change. His son and successor, Esar-haddon,
was a good general and a man of great ability.
Manasseh of Judah became his vassal, and the way
lay open to the Nile. With a large body of trained
veterans he descended upon Egypt (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 674). The
sheikh of the Bedouin provided him with the camels
which conveyed the water for the army across the
desert. Three campaigns were needed before Egypt,
under its Ethiopian ruler, could be subdued. But at
last, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 670, Esar-haddon drove the Egyptian
forces before him in fifteen days (from the 3rd to the
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
18th of Tammuz or June) all the way from the frontier
to Memphis, thrice defeating them with heavy loss,
and wounding Tirhakah himself. Three days later
Memphis fell, and Tirhakah fled to Ethiopia, leaving
Egypt to the conqueror. It was after this success
that the Assyrian monarch erected the stêlê at
Sinjerli, on which he is portrayed with Tirhakah of
Egypt and Baal of Tyre kneeling before him, each
with a ring through his lips, to which is attached a
bridle held by the Assyrian king.
</p>

<p>
Egypt was reorganised under Assyrian rule, and
measures taken to prevent the return of the Ethiopians.
It was divided into twenty satrapies, the
native princes being appointed to govern them for
their Assyrian master. At their head was placed
Necho, the vassal king of Sais. Esar-haddon now
returned to Nineveh, and on the cliffs of the Nahr
el-Kelb, near Beyrout, he engraved a record of his
conquest of Egypt and Thebes by the side of the
monument whereon, seven centuries previously,
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> had boasted of his victories over the
nations of Asia.
</p>

<p>
At first the Egyptian princes were well pleased
with their change of masters. But in Thebes there
was a strong party which sympathised with Ethiopia
rather than with Assyria. With their help, Tirhakah
returned in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 668, sailed down the Nile, and took
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
Memphis by storm. Esar-haddon started at once to
suppress the revolt. But on the way to Egypt he
died on the 10th of Marchesvan or October, and
his son, Assur-bani-pal, followed him on the throne.
</p>

<p>
The Ethiopian army was encountered near Kar-banit,
in the Delta. A complete victory was gained
over it, and Tirhakah was compelled to fly, first from
Memphis, then from Thebes. The tributary kings
whom he had displaced were restored, and Assur-bani-pal
left Egypt in the full belief that it was
tranquil. But hardly had he returned to Nineveh
before a fresh revolt broke out there. Tirhakah
began to plot with the native satraps, and even
Necho of Sais was suspected of complicity. The
commanders of the Assyrian garrisons, accordingly,
sent him and two other princes (from Tanis and
Goshen) loaded with chains to Assyria. But Assur-bani-pal,
either really convinced of Necho's innocence
or pretending to be so, not only pardoned him but
bestowed upon him a robe of honour, as well as a
sword of gold and a chariot and horses, and sent
him back to Sais, giving at the same time the government
of Athribis, whose mounds lie close to Benha,
to his son, Psammetikhos. Meanwhile Tirhakah
had again penetrated to Thebes and Memphis, where
he celebrated the festival in honour of the appearance
of a new Apis. But his power was no longer what
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
it once had been, and even before the return of
Necho he found it prudent to retire to Ethiopia.
There he died a few months later.
</p>

<p>
The Thebaid, however, continued in a state of
revolt against the Assyrian authority. Another
Ethiopian king, whom the Assyrians call Urd-Aman,
had succeeded Tirhakah, and was battling for the
sovereignty of Egypt. Urd-Aman is usually identified
with the Pharaoh Rud-Amon, whose name has
been met with on two Egyptian monuments, but
about whom nothing further is known. Some
scholars, however, read the name Tand-Aman, and
identify it with that of Tuatan-Amon or Tuant-Amon,
whose royal cartouches are engraved by the side of
those of Tirhakah in the temple of Ptah-Osiris at
Karnak. An inscription found built into a wall at
Luxor mentions his third year, and a large stêlê
erected by him at Napata was discovered among the
ruins of his capital in 1862, and is now in the
Museum of Gizeh. On this he states that in the
first year of his reign he was excited by a dream to
invade the north. Thebes opened its gates to him,
and after worshipping in the temple of Amon at
Karnak, he marched to Memphis, which he captured
after a slight resistance. Then he proceeded against
the princes of the Delta, who, however, shut themselves
up in their cities or else submitted to him.
</p>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<p>
One day Paqrur of Goshen appeared at Memphis to
do him homage, much to the surprise and delight of
the Ethiopian king. As Paqrur was the prince of
Pi-Sopd or Goshen, who had been sent to Nineveh
along with Necho, the date of Tuatan-Amon is pretty
clear. How he came to quit Egypt, however, he
does not vouchsafe to explain.
</p>

<p>
Whether Urd-Aman were Rud-Amon or Tuatan-Amon,
he gave a good deal of trouble to the
Assyrians. Thebes was securely in his hands, and
from thence he marched upon Memphis. The
Assyrian garrison and its allies were defeated in front
of the city, which was then blockaded and taken after
a long siege. Necho was captured and put to death,
and Psammetikhos escaped the same fate only by
flight into Syria. But Assyrian revenge did not tarry
long. Assur-bani-pal determined to put an end to
Egyptian revolt and Ethiopian invasion once for all.
A large army was despatched to the Nile, which overthrew
the forces of Rud-Amon in the Delta and
pursued him as far as Thebes. Thence he fled to
Kipkip in Ethiopia, and a terrible punishment was
inflicted on the capital of southern Egypt. The
whole of its inhabitants were led away into slavery.
Its temples&mdash;at once the centres of disaffection and
fortresses against attack&mdash;were half-demolished, its
monuments and palaces were destroyed, and all its
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
treasures, sacred and profane, were carried away.
Among the spoil were two obelisks, more than
seventy tons in weight, which were removed to
Nineveh as trophies of victory. The injuries which
Kambyses has been accused of inflicting on the
ancient monuments of Thebes were really the work
of the Assyrians.
</p>

<p>
How great was the impression made upon the
oriental world by the sack of Thebes may be gathered
from the reference to it by the prophet Nahum
(iii. 8-10). Nineveh itself is threatened with the
same overthrow. <q>Art thou better than No of
Amon, that was situate among the rivers, that had
the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea,
(the Nile), and her wall was from the sea? Ethiopia
and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite; Put
and Lubim were thy helpers. Yet was she carried
away, she went into captivity: her young children also
were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets:
and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all
her great men were bound in chains.</q> As the
destruction of Thebes took place about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 665,
the date of Nahum's prophecy cannot have been
much later.
</p>

<p>
In the Assyrian inscriptions Thebes is called Ni',
corresponding with the No of the Old Testament.
Both words represent the Egyptian Nu, <q>city,</q>
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
Thebes being pre-eminently <q>the city</q> of Upper
Egypt. Its patron-deity was Amon, to whom its
great temple was dedicated, and hence it is that
Nahum calls it <q>No of Amon.</q> Divided as it was
into two halves by the Nile, and encircled on either
side by canals, one of which&mdash;<q>the southern water</q>&mdash;still
runs past the southern front of the temple of
Luxor, it could truly be said that its <q>rampart
was the sea.</q> To this day the Nile is called <q>the
sea</q> by the natives of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The Ethiopians penetrated into Egypt no more.
The twenty satrapies were re-established; and
Psammetikhos received his father's principality,
though the precedence among the vassal-kings was
given to Paqrur of Goshen. For a time the country
was at peace.
</p>

<p>
Fifteen years later, however, an event occurred
which shook the Assyrian empire to its foundations.
A revolt broke out which spread throughout the
whole of it. The revolt was headed by Assur-bani-pal's
brother, the Viceroy of Babylonia, and for some
time the result wavered in the balance. But the
good generalship and disciplined forces of Assyria
eventually prevailed, and she emerged from the
struggle, exhausted indeed, but triumphant. The
empire, however, was shrunken. Gyges of Lydia
had thrown off his allegiance, and had assisted
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
Psammetikhos of Sais to make Egypt independent.
While the Assyrian armies were battling for existence
in Asia, Psammetikhos, with the Ionian and
Karian mercenaries from Lydia, was driving out the
Assyrian garrisons and overcoming his brother
satraps. One by one they disappeared before him,
and at last he had the satisfaction of seeing Egypt a
united and independent monarchy, under a monarch
who claimed to be of native race.
</p>

<p>
The blood of the founder of the twenty-sixth
dynasty was, however, mixed. He seems to have
been, partly at least, of Libyan descent, and it is
even doubtful whether his name is pure Egyptian.
Like his father, he surrounded himself with foreigners:
the Greeks and Karians, with whose help he had
gained his throne, were high in favour, and constituted
the royal body-guard. The native Egyptian army,
we are told, deserted the king in disgust and made
their way to Ethiopia. However that may be, Greek
troops were settled in <q>camps</q> in the Delta,
Greek merchants were allowed to trade and even
to build in Egypt, and the Karians became dragomen,
guides, and interpreters between the natives
and the European tourists who began to visit the
Nile.
</p>

<p>
It was during the reign of Psammetikhos <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
664-610) that the great invasion of nomad Scyths,
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
referred to in the earlier chapters of Jeremiah, swept
over Western Asia. They sacked the towns of the
Philistines and made their way to the Egyptian
frontier, but there they were bought off by Psammetikhos.
After their dispersion, the Egyptian
Pharaoh turned his eyes towards Palestine, with the
intention of restoring the Asiatic empire of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>
The twenty-sixth dynasty was an age of antiquarian
revival; not content with restoring Egypt to peace
and prosperity, its kings aimed also at restoring the
Egypt of the past. Egyptian art again puts on
an antique form, temples are repaired or erected in
accordance with ancient models, and literature reflects
the general tendency. The revival only wanted
originality to make it successful; as it is, the art
of the twenty-sixth dynasty is careful and good, and
under its rule Egypt enjoyed for the last time a
St. Luke's summer of culture and renown.
</p>

<p>
The power of Assyria was passing away. The
great rebellion, and the wars in Elam which followed,
had drained it of its resources. The Scythic invasion
destroyed what little strength was left.
Before Psammetikhos died Nineveh was already
surrounded by its foes, and four years later it perished
utterly.
</p>

<p>
The provinces of the west became virtually independent.
Josiah of Judah still called himself a vassal
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
of the Assyrian monarch, but he acted as if the
Assyrian monarchy did not exist. The Assyrian
governor of Samaria was deprived of his authority,
and Jewish rule was obeyed throughout what had
been the territory of the Ten Tribes.
</p>

<p>
The weakness of Assyria was the opportunity of
Egypt. The earlier years of the reign of Psammetikhos
were spent in reorganising his kingdom and
army, in suppressing all opposition to his government,
and in rebuilding the ruined cities and temples.
Then he marched into Palestine and endeavoured to
secure once more for Egypt the cities of the Philistines.
Ashdod was taken after a prolonged siege, and
an Egyptian garrison placed in it.
</p>

<p>
The successor of Psammetikhos was his son Necho,
who carried out the foreign policy of his father. The
old canal which ran from the Red Sea at Suez to the
Nile near Zagazig, and which centuries of neglect
had allowed to be choked, was again partially cleared
out, and <q>the tongue of the Egyptian sea was cut off</q>
(Isa. xi. 15). Ships were also sent from Suez under
Phœnician pilots to circumnavigate Africa. Three
years did they spend on the voyage, and after passing
the Straits of Gibraltar, finally arrived safely at the
mouths of the Nile. There an incredulous people
heard that as they were sailing westward the sun was
on their right hand.
</p>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<p>
But long before the return of his ships, Necho had
placed himself at the head of his army and entered
on the invasion of Asia. The Syrians were defeated
at Migdol, and Gaza was occupied. The Egyptian
army then proceeded to march along the sea-coast by
the ancient military road, which struck inland at the
Nahr el-Kelb. But the Jewish king, pleading his
duty to his Assyrian suzerain, attempted to block
the way; the result was a battle in the plain of
Megiddo, where the Jewish forces were totally routed,
and Josiah himself carried from the field mortally
wounded. Necho now overran northern Syria as far
as the Euphrates, and then returned southward to
punish the Jews. Jerusalem was captured by
treachery, and Jehoahaz, the new king, deposed
after a reign of only three months. The Pharaoh
then made his brother Eliakim king in his stead,
changing his name to Jehoiakim. The city was fined
a talent of gold and a hundred talents of silver, and
Necho sent his armour to the temple of Apollo near
Miletus as a thank-offering to the god of his Greek
mercenaries.
</p>

<p>
The empire of Thothmes was restored, at all
events in Asia. But it lasted hardly more than
three years. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 605 a decisive battle was
fought at Carchemish, on the Euphrates, now
Jerablûs, between Necho and the Babylonian prince
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
Nebuchadrezzar, who commanded the army of his
father Nabopolassar. The Egyptians fled in confusion,
and the Asiatic empire was utterly lost. The Jewish
king transferred his allegiance to the conqueror, and
for three years <q>became his servant.</q> Then he
rebelled, probably in consequence of a fresh attempt
made by the Egyptians to recover their power in
Palestine. The attempt, however, failed, and a
Babylonian army was sent against Jerusalem.
Jehoiakim was already dead, but his son Jehoiachin,
along with the leading citizens, the military class,
and the artisans&mdash;<q>ten thousand captives</q> in all&mdash;was
carried into exile in Babylonia (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 599). His
uncle Zedekiah was placed on the throne, and for
nearly nine years he remained faithful to his Babylonian
master.
</p>

<p>
Then came temptation from the side of Egypt.
Psammetikhos <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, who had succeeded his father
Necho in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 594, prepared to march into Palestine,
and contest the supremacy over Western Asia with
the Babylonian monarch. A Babylonian army was
already besieging the revolted city of Jerusalem
when the forces of the Pharaoh appeared in sight.
The Babylonians broke up their camp and retired,
and it seemed as if the rebellion of the Jewish king
had been successful (Jer. xxxvii. 5, 11; Ezek. xvii.
15).
</p>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<p>
But it was not for long. The Egyptians returned
to <q>their own land,</q> and the siege of Jerusalem was
recommenced. At last, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 588, the city was
taken, its king and most of its inhabitants led into
captivity, and its temple and palace burned with fire.
Judah was placed under a Babylonian governor, and
the authority of the Babylonians acknowledged as
far as Gaza.
</p>

<p>
Psammetikhos <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> had died in the preceding year,
and his son Uahabra, the Apries of the Greeks, the
Hophra of the Old Testament, occupied his place.
The army which had gone to the help of Zedekiah
had doubtless been sent by him. He had recaptured
Gaza, and marched along the coast to Sidon, which
he captured, and Tyre, which was in rebellion against
the Chaldæans, while his fleet defeated the combined
forces of the Cyprians and Phœnicians, and held the
sea. A hieroglyphic inscription, erected by a native
of Gebal and commemorative of the invasion, has
recently been found near Sidon. But the Egyptian
conquests were again lost almost as quickly as they
had been made.
</p>

<p>
Palestine became a Babylonian province up to
the frontiers of Egypt. Many of the Jews who had
been left in it fled to Egypt. Their numbers were
reinforced by a band of outlaws, of whom Johanan
was the leader, who had murdered the Babylonian
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
governor and had dragged into Egypt with them the
prophet Jeremiah and his scribe Baruch. Jeremiah
in vain protested against their conduct, and predicted
that Hophra should be slain by his enemies,
and that Nebuchadrezzar should set up his throne
on that very pavement <q>at the entry of Pharaoh's
house in Tahpanhes</q> where the prophet was then
standing. Tahpanhes is almost certainly Tel ed-Defneh,
the Daphnæ of Greek geography, which
stands in the mid-desert about twelve miles to the
west of Kantara on the Suez Canal, and where
Professor Flinders Petrie made excavations for the
Egypt Exploration Fund in 1886. There he found the
remains of a great fortress and camp, which had been
built by Psammetikhos <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> for his Greek mercenaries.
The walls of the camp were forty feet in thickness,
and the ruins of the fortress still go by the name
of the <q>Castle of the Jew's Daughter.</q> In front of
it is a brick pavement, just like that described by
Jeremiah.
</p>

<p>
Daphnæ, in fact, was one of the chief fortresses
of Egypt on the side of Asia, and it was accordingly
the chief station of the Greek mercenaries. It
commanded the entrance to the Delta, and was
almost the first place in Egypt that the traveller
from Palestine who came by the modern caravan
road would approach. It was, therefore, the first
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
settlement at which Jewish fugitives who wished to
avoid the Babylonian garrison at Gaza would be
likely to arrive. And it was also the first object
of attack on the part of an invader from the East.
Its possession opened to him the way to Memphis.
</p>

<p>
That Nebuchadrezzar actually invaded Egypt, as
Jeremiah had predicted, we now know from a fragment
of his annals. In his thirty-seventh year (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
567) he marched into Egypt, defeating the Pharaoh
Amasis, and the soldiers of <q>Phut of the Ionians,</q>
<q>a distant land which is in the midst of the sea.</q>
The enemies, therefore, into whose hands Hophra
was to fall were not the Babylonians. They were,
in fact, his own subjects.
</p>

<p>
He had pursued the Hellenising policy of his
predecessors with greater thoroughness than they
had done, and had thus aroused the jealousy and
alarm of the native population. The Greek mercenaries
alone had his confidence, and the Egyptians
accused him of betraying the native troops whom he
had sent to the help of the Libyans against the
Greek colony of Kyrênê. Amasis (or Ahmes), his
brother-in-law, put himself at the head of the rebels.
A battle was fought near Sais between the Greek
troops of Hophra on the one side and the revolted
Egyptians on the other, which ended in the defeat
of the Greeks and the capture of Hophra himself.
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
Amasis was proclaimed king (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 570), and though
the captive Pharaoh was at first treated with respect,
he was afterwards put to death.
</p>

<p>
The change of monarch made little difference
to the Greeks in Egypt. They were too valuable,
both as soldiers and as traders, for the Pharaoh to
dispense with their services. The mercenaries were
removed from Daphnæ to Memphis, in the very
heart of the kingdom, and fresh privileges were
granted to the merchants of Naukratis. The Pharaoh
married a Greek wife, and a demotic papyrus, now
at Paris, even describes how he robbed the temples
of Memphis, On and Bubastis of their endowments
and handed them over to the Greek troops. <q>The
Council</q> which sat under him ordered that <q>the
vessels, the fuel, the linen, and the dues</q> hitherto
enjoyed by their gods and their priests should be
given instead to the foreigner. In this act of
sacrilege the Egyptians of a later day saw the cause
of the downfall of their country. The invasion of
Nebuchadrezzar had passed over it without producing
much injury; indeed, it does not seem to have
extended beyond the eastern half of the Delta.
But a new power, that of Cyrus, was rising in the
East. Amasis had foreseen the coming storm, and
had occupied Cyprus in advance. If Xenophon is
to be believed, he had also sent troops to the aid
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
of Krœsus of Lydia. But all was of no avail. The
power of Cyrus steadily increased. The empires of
Lydia and Babylonia went down before it, and when
his son Kambyses succeeded him in July, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 529,
the new empire extended from the Mediterranean
to India and from the Caspian to the borders of
Egypt. It was clear that the fertile banks of the
Nile would be the next object of attack.
</p>

<p>
Greek vanity asserted that the actual cause of
the invasion was the Greek mercenary Phanês. He
had deserted to Kambyses, and explained to him
how Egypt could be entered. That Phanês was a
name used by the Egyptian Greeks we know from
its occurrence on the fragment of a large vase discovered
by Professor Petrie at Naukratis. Here we
read: <q>Phanês the son of Glaukos dedicated me to
Apollo of Naukratis.</q> But the invasion of Egypt
by Kambyses was the necessary consequence of the
policy which had laid the whole of the oriental world
at his father's feet.
</p>

<p>
Amasis died while the army of Kambyses was on
its march (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 526), and his son Psammetikhos <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>
had to bear the brunt of the attack. A battle was
fought near Pelusium, and though the Greek and
Karian auxiliaries did their best, the invading forces
gained the day. The Pharaoh fled to Memphis,
which was thereupon besieged by Kambyses. The
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
siege was a short one. The city of <q>the White
Wall</q> was taken, Psammetikhos made a prisoner,
and his son, together with two thousand youths of
the leading Egyptian families, was put to death. For
a while Psammetikhos himself was allowed to live,
but the fears of the conqueror soon caused him to
be executed, and with his death came the end of
the twenty-sixth dynasty and the independence of
Egypt.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Age Of The Ptolemies.</head>

<p>
Judah had profited by the revolution which had
been so disastrous to the monarchy of the Nile.
The overthrow of the Babylonian empire and the
rise of Cyrus had brought deliverance from exile
and the restoration of the temple and its services.
In the Jewish colony at Jerusalem, Cyrus and his
successors had, as it were, a bridle upon Egypt;
gratitude to their deliverer and freedom to enjoy
the theocracy which had taken the place of the
Davidic monarchy made the Jewish people an outpost
and garrison upon whose loyalty the Persian
king could rely.
</p>

<p>
The yoke of the Zoroastrian Darius and his
descendants pressed heavily, on the other hand, upon
the priests and people of Egypt. Time after time
they attempted to revolt. Their first rebellion, under
Khabbash, saved Greece from the legions of Darius
and postponed the day of Persian invasion to a time
when the incapable Xerxes sat upon the throne of
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
his energetic father. A second time they rose in
insurrection in the reign of Artaxerxes <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, the successor
of Xerxes. But under Artaxerxes <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> came
a more formidable outbreak, which ended in the
recovery of Egyptian independence and the establishment
of the last three dynasties of native kings.
</p>

<p>
For sixty-five years (from <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 414 to 349) Egypt
preserved its independence. More than once the
Persians sought to recover it, but they were foiled
by the Spartan allies of the Pharaoh or by the
good fortune of the Egyptians. But civil feuds
and cowardice sapped the strength of the Egyptian
resistance. Greek mercenaries and sailors now fought
in the ranks of the Persians as well as in those of
the Egyptians, and the result of the struggle between
Persia and Egypt was in great measure dependent
on the amount of pay the two sides could afford
to give them. The army was insubordinate, and
between the Greek and Egyptian soldiers there
was jealousy and feud. Nektanebo <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 367-49),
the last of the Pharaohs, had dethroned his own
father, and though he had once driven the Persian
king Artaxerxes Ochus back from the coasts of
Egypt, he failed to do so a second time. The Greeks
were left to defend themselves as best they could
at Pelusium, while Nektanebo retired to Memphis
with 60,000 worthless native troops. From thence
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
he fled to Ethiopia with his treasures, leaving his
country in the hands of the Persian. Ochus wreaked
his vengeance on the Egyptian priests, destroying
the temples, demanding a heavy ransom for the
sacred records he had robbed, setting up an ass&mdash;a
symbol in Egyptian eyes of all that was evil and
unclean&mdash;as the patron-god of the conquered land,
and slaying the sacred bull Apis in sacrifice to the
new divinity. The murder of Ochus by his Egyptian
eunuch Bagoas was the penalty he paid for these
outrages on the national faith.
</p>

<p>
Egypt never again was free. Its rulers have been
of manifold races and forms of faith, but they have
never again been Egyptians. Persians, Greeks and
Romans, Arabs, Kurds, Circassians, Mameluk slaves
and Turks, Frenchmen and Englishmen, have all
governed or misgoverned it, but throughout this long
page of its history there is no sign of native political
life. Religion or taxation has alone seemed able
to stir the people into movement or revolt. For
aspirations after national freedom we look in vain.
</p>

<p>
The Persian was not left long in the possession of
his rebellious province. Egypt opened her gates to
Alexander of Macedon, as in later ages she opened
her gates to the Arab 'Amru. The Greeks had long
been associated in the Egyptian mind with opposition
to the hated Persian, and it was as a Greek that
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
Alexander entered the country. Memphis and
Thebes welcomed him, and he did his best to prove
to his subjects that he had indeed come among them
as one of their ancient kings. Hardly had he reached
Memphis before he went in state to the temple of
Apis and offered sacrifice to the sacred bull. Then,
after founding Alexandria at the spot where the
native village of Rakoti stood, he made his way to
the Oasis of Ammon, the modern Siwah, among the
sands of the distant desert, and there was greeted by
the high-priest of the temple as the son of the god.
Like the Pharaohs of old, the Macedonian conqueror
became the son of Amon-Ra, and in Egypt at least
claimed divine honours.
</p>

<p>
Before leaving Egypt Alexander appointed the
nomarchs who were to govern it, and ordered that
justice should be administered according to the
ancient law of the land. He also sent 7000 Samaritans
into the Thebaid; some of them were settled
in the Fayyûm, and in the papyri discovered by
Professor Petrie at Hawâra mention is made of a
village which they had named Samaria. Appointing
Kleomenês prefect of Egypt and collector of
the taxes, Alexander now hurried away to the
Euphrates, there to overthrow the shattered relics of
the Persian Empire.
</p>

<p>
It was while he was at Ekbatana that his friend
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
Hêphæstiôn died, and Alexander wrote to Egypt to
inquire of the oracle of Ammon what honours it was
lawful for him to pay to the dead man. In reply
Hêphæstiôn was pronounced to be a god, and a
temple was accordingly erected to him at Alexandria,
and the new lighthouse on the island of Pharos was
called after his name.
</p>

<p>
When Alexander died suddenly and unexpectedly,
the council of his generals which assembled at
Babylon declared his half-brother, Philip Arridæus,
to be his successor. But they reserved to themselves
all the real power in Alexander's empire. Ptolemy,
the son of Lagos, chose Egypt as the seat of his
government, which was accordingly handed over to
him by Kleomenês on his arrival there, a year after
the accession of the new king. His first act was to
put Kleomenês to death.
</p>

<p>
Then came the long funeral procession bearing
the corpse of Alexander from Babylon to the tomb
that was to be erected for him in his new city of
Alexandria. More than a year passed while it wound
its way slowly from city to city, till at last it arrived
at Memphis. Here the body of the great conqueror
rested awhile until the gorgeous sepulchre was made
ready in which it was finally to repose.
</p>

<p>
It was plain that Ptolemy was aiming at independent
power. Perdikkas, the regent, accordingly
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
attacked him, carrying in his train the young princes,
Philip Arridæus, and Alexander Ægos, the infant
son of Alexander. But the invading army was
routed below Memphis, Perdikkas was slain, and
the young princes fell into the hands of the conqueror.
From this time forward, Ptolemy, though nominally
a subject, acted as if he were a king.
</p>

<p>
Nikanôr was sent into Syria to annex it to Egypt.
Jerusalem alone resisted the invaders, but it was
assaulted on the Sabbath when the defenders withdrew
from the walls, and all further opposition was
at end. Palestine and Cœle-Syria were again united
with the kingdom on the Nile.
</p>

<p>
The union, however, did not last long. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 315
Philip Arridæus was murdered, and Alexander was
proclaimed successor to his empty dignity. The
year following, Antigonus, the rival of Ptolemy in
Asia Minor, made ready to invade Egypt. But
Ptolemy had already conquered Kyrênê and Cyprus,
and was master of the sea. Syria and Palestine,
however, submitted to Antigonus, and though Ptolemy
gained a decisive victory over his enemies at Gaza,
he did not think it prudent to pursue it. He contented
himself, therefore, with razing the fortifications
of Acre and Jaffa, of Samaria and Gaza.
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 312 the generals of Alexander, who still
called themselves the lieutenants of his son, came to a
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
general agreement, each keeping that portion of the
empire which he had made his own. The agreement
was almost immediately followed by the murder of
Alexander Ægos. Cleopatra, the sister of the great
Alexander, and his niece Thessalonika alone remained
of the royal family, and Cleopatra, on her
way to Egypt to marry Ptolemy, was assassinated by
Antigonus (in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 308), and Alexander's niece soon
afterwards shared the same fate. The family of
<q>the son of Ammon,</q> the annihilator of the Persian
Empire, was extinct.
</p>

<p>
Two years later, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 306, an end was put to
the farce so long played by the generals of Alexander,
and each of them assumed the title of king.
Ptolemy took that of <q>king of Egypt.</q> To this the
Greeks afterwards added the name of Sôtêr, <q>Saviour,</q>
when his supplies of corn had saved the Rhodians
from destruction during their heroic defence of their
city against the multitudinous war-ships of Antigonus.
</p>

<p>
Throughout his rule, Ptolemy never forgot the
needs and interests of the kingdom over which he
ruled. Alexandria was completed, with its unrivalled
harbours, its stately public buildings, its broad quays
and its spacious streets. From first to last it remained
the Greek capital of Egypt. It was Greek
in its origin, Greek in its architecture, Greek in its
population; Greek also in its character, its manners,
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
and its faith. Cut off from the rest of Egypt by the
Mareotic Lake, and enjoying a European climate, it
was from its foundation what it is to-day, a city of
Europe rather than of Egypt. From it, as from an
impregnable watch-tower, the Ptolemies directed the
fortunes of their kingdom: it was not only the key
to Egypt, it was also a bridle upon it. The wealth
of the world passed through its streets and harbours;
the religions and philosophies of East and West met
within its halls. Ptolemy had founded in it a
university, a prototype of Oxford and Cambridge in
modern England, of the Azhar in modern Cairo. In
the Museum, as it was called, a vast library was
gathered together, and its well-endowed chairs were
filled with learned professors from all parts of the
Greek world, who wrote books and delivered lectures
and dined together at the royal charge.
</p>

<p>
But the Greeks were not the only inhabitants of
the new city. The Jews also settled there in large
numbers on the eastern side of the town, attracted by
the offers of Ptolemy and the belief that the rising
centre of trade would be better worth inhabiting
than the wasted fields of Palestine. All the rights of
Greek citizenship were granted to them, and they
were placed on a footing almost of equality with
Ptolemy's own countrymen.
</p>

<p>
The native Egyptians were far worse treated.
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
They had become <q>the hewers of wood and carriers
of water</q> for their new Greek masters. It was they
who furnished the government with its revenue, but
in return they possessed no rights, no privileges.
When land was wanted for the veterans of the
Macedonian army, as, for example, in the Fayyûm,
it was taken from them without compensation.
Taxes, ever heavier and heavier, were laid upon
them; and every attempt at remonstrance or murmuring
was visited with immediate punishment.
The Egyptian had no rights unless he could be
registered a citizen of Alexandria, and this it was
next to impossible for him to be.
</p>

<p>
It is true that the Egyptians were told all this
was done in order that their own laws and customs
might not be interfered with. While the Greeks and
Jews were governed by Greek law, the Egyptians
were governed by the old law of the land. But it
was forgotten that the laws were administered by
Greeks, and that the higher officials were also
Greeks, who, as against an Egyptian, possessed
arbitrary power. It was only amongst themselves,
as between Egyptian and Egyptian, that the natives
of the country enjoyed any benefit from the laws
under which they lived; wherever the government
and the Greeks were concerned, they were like outcasts,
who could be punished, but not tried.
</p>

<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>

<p>
Nevertheless the country for many years remained
tranquil. Unlike the Persians, the Greeks respected
the religion of the people. Ptolemy did his utmost
to conciliate the priesthood; their temples were restored
and decorated, their festivals were treated
with honour; above all, their endowments were untouched.
And with the priesthood disposed to be
friendly towards him, Ptolemy had no reason to be
afraid. The priests were the national leaders; they
it was who had stirred up the revolts against the
Persian, and the temples in which they served had
been the fortresses and rallying-points of the rebel
armies. The Egyptians have always been an intensely
religious people; whatever may have been
their form of creed, whether pagan, Christian, or
Moslem, they have clung to it with tenacity and
battled for it, sometimes with fanatical zeal. Religion
will arouse them when nothing else can do so; by
the side of it even the love of gain has but little
influence.
</p>

<p>
Besides conciliating the priesthood, Ptolemy
planted garrisons of Greeks in several parts of the
country. Bodies of veterans colonised the Fayyûm,
and Ptolemais, now Menshîyeh, in Upper Egypt, was
a Greek city modelled in all respects upon Alexandria.
The public accounts were kept in Greek,
and though the clerks and tax-gatherers were usually
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
natives who had received a Greek education, many
of them were Greeks by birth and even Jews.
<q>Ostraka,</q> or inscribed potsherds, have been found at
Thebes, which show that in the days of Ptolemy
Physkôn, a Jew, Simon, the son of Eleazar, farmed
the taxes there for the temple of Amon. As he did
not himself know Greek, his receipts were written for
him by one of his sons. After his death he was succeeded
in his office by his son Philoklês. The name
is noticeable, as it shows how rapidly the Jews of
Egypt could become wholly Greek. The religion
of his forefathers was not likely to sit heavily on the
shoulders of the tax-gatherer of a heathen temple,
and we need not wonder at the Hellenisation of his
family. Simon was a sample of many of his brethren:
in adopting Greek culture the Jews of Egypt began
to forget that they were Jews. It required the shock
of persecution at Jerusalem, and the Maccabean war
of independence to recall them to a recollection of
their past history and a sense of the mission of their
race.
</p>

<p>
With the rise of the Greek kingdom in Egypt,
the canonical books of the Old Testament come to
an end. Jaddua, the last high-priest recorded in the
Book of Nehemiah (xii. 7, 22), met Alexander the
Great at Mizpeh, and if Josephus is to be trusted,
obtained from him a recognition of the ancient
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
privileges of the Jews and their exemption from
taxation every Sabbatical year. The First Book of
Chronicles (iii. 23) seems to bring the genealogy of
the descendants of Zorobabel down to an even later
date. But where the canonical books break off, the
books of the Apocrypha begin. Jesus the son of
Sirach, in his prologue to the Book of Ecclesiasticus,
tells us that he had translated it in Egypt from
Hebrew into Greek, when Euergetês, the third
Ptolemy, was king, and thirty-eight years after its
compilation by his grandfather Jesus. Like most of
the apocryphal books, it thus had a Palestinian
origin, but its translation into Greek indicates the
intercourse that was going on between the Jews of
Palestine and those of Egypt, as well as the general
adoption of the Greek language by the Egyptian
Jews.
</p>

<p>
The translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into
Greek about the same period is a yet more striking
illustration of the same fact. The name of <q>Septuagint,</q>
which the translation still retains, perpetuates
the legend, derived from the false Aristæas, of its
having been made all at one time by seventy (or
seventy-two) translators. But internal evidence shows
that such could not have been the case. The various
books of the Canon were translated at different times,
and the translators exhibit very different degrees of
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
ability and acquaintance with the Hebrew language.
The Pentateuch was the first to be rendered into
Greek; the other books followed afterwards, and it
would appear that the Book of Ecclesiastes never
found a place in the translation at all. The Greek
translation of the book which is now found in the
Septuagint was probably made by Aquila.
</p>

<p>
It was under Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, who justified his title of
Philadelphus, or <q>Brother-loving,</q> by the murder of
his two brothers, that the work of translation was
begun. Ptolemy Sôtêr, his father, had resigned his
crown two years before his death, and the event
proved that his confidence in his son's filial piety was
not misplaced. The coronation of Philadelphus at
Alexandria was celebrated with one of the most
gorgeous pageants the world has ever seen, the
details of which are preserved by Athenæus. Under
the new king the internal development of the
monarchy went on apace. The canal was opened
which connected the Nile with the Red Sea, and at
its outlet near Suez a town was built called Arsinoê,
after the king's sister. The ports of Berenikê and
Philotera (now Qoseir) were constructed and fortified
on the coast of the Red Sea, and roads made to them
from Koptos and Syênê on the Nile. In this way
the ivory and gems of the Sudân could be brought to
Egypt without passing through the hostile territories
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
of the Ethiopians in Upper Nubia. In the eastern
desert itself the mines of emerald and gold were
worked until the royal revenue was increased to more
than three millions sterling a year.
</p>

<p>
Though Ptolemy Philadelphus was fond of show,
he was not extravagant, and his income was sufficient
not only to maintain a large army and navy and
protect efficiently the frontier of his kingdom, but also
to leave a large reserve fund in the treasury. It was
said to amount to as much as a hundred millions
sterling. It was no wonder, therefore, that Alexandria
became filled with sumptuous buildings. The
Pharos or lighthouse was finished by Sôstratos, as
well as the tomb of Alexander, whose body was
moved from Memphis to the golden sarcophagus
which had been prepared for it. The library of the
Museum was stocked with books until 400,000 rolls
of papyrus were collected together, and men of
science and learning from all parts of the world were
attracted to it by the munificence of the king. The
principal librarianship, however, changed hands on
the accession of the new king. Demetrius Phalereus,
the ex-tyrant of Athens, who had been the first
librarian, had offended Philadelphus by advising that
the crown should descend to his elder brother instead
of to himself, and he had accordingly to make way for
Zênodotos of Ephesus, famous as a critic of Homer.
</p>

<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>

<p>
Among the books which found a place in the
great library of Alexandria was doubtless the Greek
translation of the Pentateuch. Philadelphus showed
remarkable favour to the Jews. The Jewish captives
of his soldiers were ransomed by him and given
homes in various parts of Egypt. One hundred and
twenty thousand slaves were thus freed, the king
paying for each 120 drachmas, or 30 shekels, the
price of a slave according to the Mosaic Law. It is
quite possible that there may be some truth in the
legend that the Greek translation of the Old Testament
was made at his desire. Whether or not we
believe that he sent two Greek Jews, Aristæus and
Andræus, with costly gifts to Eleazar the high-priest
at Jerusalem, asking him to select fit men for the
purpose, he was probably not unwilling that a copy
of the sacred books of his Jewish subjects, in a form
intelligible to the Greeks, should be added to the
library. We must not forget that it was he who
employed Manetho, the priest of Sebennytos, to write
in Greek the history of his country, which he compiled
from the hieroglyphic monuments and hieratic papyri
of the native temples.
</p>

<p>
Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, Euergetês, the eldest son of Philadelphus,
succeeded his father in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 246. A war
with Syria broke out at the beginning of his reign,
and the march of the Egyptian army as far as
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
Seleucia, the capital of the Syrian kingdom on the
Euphrates, was one uninterrupted triumph. On his
return, Ptolemy laid his offerings on the altar at
Jerusalem, and thanked the God of the Jews for his
success. The Jewish community might well be
pardoned for believing that in the conqueror of Syria
they had a new proselyte to their faith.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptians had equal reason to be satisfied
with their king. Among the spoils of his Syrian
campaign were 2500 vases and statues of the
Egyptian deities which Kambyses had carried to
Persia nearly three centuries before. They were restored
to the temples of Upper Egypt, from which
they had been taken, with stately ceremonies and
amid the rejoicing of the people, and Ptolemy was
henceforth known among his subjects as Euergetês,
their <q>Benefactor.</q>
</p>

<p>
Euergetês, in fact, seems to have been the most
Egyptian and least Greek of all the Ptolemies.
Alone among them he visited Thebes and paid
homage to the gods of Egypt. Their temples were
rebuilt and crowded with offerings, and the priesthood
naturally regarded him as a king after their
own heart. He, too, like the Pharaohs of old, turned
his attention to the conquest of Ethiopia, which his
predecessors had been content to neglect.<note place='foot'>Sharpe, <hi rend='italic'>History of Egypt</hi>, i. p. 346.</note> It was
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
under Euergetês, moreover, that the so-called Decree
of Canôpus was drawn up in hieroglyphics and
demotic Egyptian as well as in Greek. Its occasion
was the death of Berenikê, the king's daughter, to
whom the Egyptian priests determined to grant
divine honours. It is the first time that we find
the old script and language of Egypt taking its
place by the side of that of the Macedonian conqueror,
and it is significant that the Greek transcript
occupies the third place.
</p>

<p>
Judah had hitherto remained tranquil and at
peace under the government of the Ptolemies. The
high-priests had taken the place of the kings, and
their authority was undisputed. At times, indeed,
the coveted dignity was the cause of family feuds.
Jonathan, the father of Jaddua (Neh. xii. 11, 22),
had murdered his brother Joshua, whom he suspected
of trying to supplant him, and the example he set
was destined to have followers. But outside his own
family the high-priest ruled with almost despotic
power. Simon the Just (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 300), with whom ends
the list of <q>famous men</q> given by Jesus the son
of Sirach (iv. 1-21), repaired and fortified the temple
as well as the fortress which guarded it. Jewish
tradition ascribed to him the completion of the
Canon of the Old Testament which had been begun
by Ezra, and it was through him that the oral
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
Mosaic tradition of Pharisaism made its way to
Antigonus Socho, the first writer of the Mishna or
text of the Talmud, and the teacher of the founder
of Sadduceism. The grandson of Simon, Onias <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>,
imperilled the authority his predecessors had enjoyed.
His covetousness led him to withhold the tribute of
£3000, due each year from the Temple to the Jewish
king, and in spite of an envoy from Ptolemy and the
remonstrances of his countrymen, he refused to give
it up.
</p>

<p>
Jerusalem was saved by the address and readiness
of Joseph, the brother of Onias. He hastened
to Egypt, ingratiated himself with Ptolemy, and
succeeded in being appointed farmer of the taxes
for Syria and Palestine. The Jews were saved, but
a rival power to that of the high-priest was established,
which led eventually to civil war. The greed
of Onias was the first scene in the drama which is
unfolded in the Books of the Maccabees.
</p>

<p>
Euergetês was the last of the <q>good</q> Ptolemies.
His son and successor, Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, was the incarnation
of weakness, cruelty and vice. He began his
reign with the murder of his mother and only
brother, taking the title of Philopator&mdash;<q>Lover of
his Father</q>&mdash;by way of compensation. Syria was
reconquered by Antiochus the Great, but his Greek
phalanxes were beaten at Raphia by the Egyptians,
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
now armed and trained in the Macedonian fashion,
and the gratitude of Philopator showed itself in a
visit to the temple at Jerusalem, where he sacrificed
to the God of the Jews and attempted to penetrate
into the Holy of Holies. A tumult was the consequence,
and the exasperated king on his return
to Egypt deprived the Jews of their Greek citizenship,
and ordered them to be tattooed with the
figure of an ivy-leaf in honour of Bacchus, and to
sacrifice on the altars of the Greek gods.
</p>

<p>
The Jews had hitherto been the staunch supporters
of the royal house of Egypt, and had held
the fortress of Jerusalem for it against the power of
Syria. But Philopator had now alienated them for
ever. Nor was he more successful with the native
Egyptians. First the Egyptian troops mutinied;
then came revolt in Upper Egypt. The Ethiopian
princes, whose memorials are found in the Nubian
temples of Debod and Dakkeh, were invited to
Thebes, and an Ethiopian dynasty again ruled in
Upper Egypt. The names of the kings who composed
it have recently been found in deeds written
in demotic characters.
</p>

<p>
Philopator died of his debaucheries after a reign
of seventeen years (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 204), leaving a child of five
years of age&mdash;the future Ptolemy Epiphanês&mdash;to
succeed him. The Alexandrine mob was in a state
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
of riot, the army was untrustworthy, and Antiochus
was again on the march against Syria. The Egyptian
forces were defeated at Banias (Cæsarea Philippi),
the Jews having gone over to the invader, in return
for which Antiochus remitted the taxes due from
Jerusalem, and not only released all the ministers
of the temple from future taxation, but sent a large
sum of money for its support. By a treaty with
Rome the possession of the country was assured to
him (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 188), and colonies of Mesopotamian Jews
were settled in Lydia and Phrygia.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, Epiphanês, was growing
up, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 196 accordingly it was determined
that he should be crowned. The coronation took
place at Memphis, and a decree was made lightening
the burdens of the country, relieving the <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign>
from being impressed for the navy, and granting
further endowments to the priests. It is this decree
which is engraved on the famous Rosetta Stone.
</p>

<p>
But the revolt of the Egyptians still continued,
and had already spread northward. Reference is
made in the decree to rebellion in the Busirite nome
of the Delta, and to a siege of the city of Lykopolis,
in which the insurgents had fortified themselves. It
was at this time, too, that the city of Abydos was
taken by storm and its temples finally ruined, as
we gather from a Greek scrawl on the walls of the
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
temple of Seti. But in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 185 a decisive victory
was gained by the Greek mercenaries over the
revolted Egyptians. Their four leaders surrendered
on the king's promise of a free pardon, and were
brought before him at Sais. There, however, he tied
them to his chariot-wheels in imitation of Achilles,
and dragged them still living round the city walls,
after which he returned to Alexandria and entered
his capital in triumph.
</p>

<p>
The crimes of Epiphanês led to his murder in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 180, and his seven-year-old son, Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>,
Philomêtor, was proclaimed king under the regency
of his mother. While she lived there was peace,
but after her death the Syrian king, Antiochus
Epiphanês, threw himself upon Egypt, captured his
nephew Philomêtor, and held his court in Memphis.
Thereupon Philomêtor's younger brother, whose
corpulency had given him the nickname of Physkôn,
<q>the Bloated,</q> proclaimed himself king at Alexandria,
and called upon Rome for help. Antiochus withdrew,
leaving Philomêtor king of the Egyptians, and
Physkôn, who had taken the title of Euergetês <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>,
king of the Greeks at Alexandria. Thanks to the
brotherly forbearance of Philomêtor, the two reigned
together in harmony for several years. Antiochus
Epiphanês, however, had again invaded Egypt,
but had been warned off its soil by the Roman
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
ambassadors. Rome now affected to regard the
kingdom of the Ptolemies as a protected state, and
the successors of Alexander were in no condition to
resist the orders of the haughty republic. Things had
indeed changed since the days when Philadelphus
in the plenitude of his glory deigned to congratulate
the Italian state on its defeat of the Epirots, and
the Roman senate regarded his embassy as the
highest of possible honours.
</p>

<p>
The command of the Romans to leave Egypt
alone was sullenly obeyed by Antiochus Epiphanês.
But he had no choice in the matter. He had more
than enough on his hands at home without risking
a quarrel with Rome. The Jews were in full rebellion.
The Hellenising party among them&mdash;<q>the
ungodly</q> of the Books of Maccabees&mdash;had grown
numerous and strong, and had united themselves
with the civil rivals of the high-priests. Between
the party of progress and the orthodox supporters
of the Law there was soon open war, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 175,
Antiochus Epiphanês, tempted by the higher bribe,
was induced to join in the fray, and throw the
whole weight of his power on the side of innovation.
Onias <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> was deposed from the high-priesthood,
and his brother Joshua, the leader of <q>the ungodly,</q>
was appointed in his place, with leave to change
the name of the Jews to that of Antiochians. Joshua
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
forthwith took the Greek name of Jason, established
a gymnasium at Jerusalem, sent offerings to the
festival of Heraklês at Tyre, and discouraged the
rite of circumcision. But Jason's rule was short-lived.
A Benjamite, Menelaus, succeeded in driving
him out of the country and usurping the office of
high-priest, while Onias was put to death.
</p>

<p>
The second Syrian invasion of Egypt took place
two years later. The story of the check received
by Antiochus Epiphanês came to Judæa with all
the exaggerations usual in the East; Antiochus was
reported to be dead, and Jason accordingly marched
upon Jerusalem, massacred his opponents, and blockaded
Menelaus in the citadel. But Antiochus had
been wounded only in his pride, and he turned
back from the Nile burning with mortification and
anxious to vent his anger upon the first who came
in his way. The outrage committed by Jason was
a welcome pretext. The defenceless population of
Jerusalem was partly massacred, partly sold into
slavery, and under the guidance of Menelaus he
entered the Temple and carried away the sacred
vessels, as well as its other treasure. Philip the
Phrygian was appointed governor of the city, while
Menelaus remained high-priest.
</p>

<p>
Severer measures were to follow. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 168
there had been a rising in Jerusalem, which was
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
thereupon captured on a Sabbath-day by the Syrian
general, the greater part of it being sacked and
burned, and a portion of the city wall thrown down.
A garrison was established on Mount Zion, which
at that time overlooked the Temple-hill, and a fierce
persecution of the Jews commenced. Every effort
was made to compel them to forsake their religion,
to eat swine's flesh, and to worship the gods of the
Greeks. It was then that <q>the abomination of
desolation</q> was seen in the Holy of Holies, the
temples of Samaria and Jerusalem being re-dedicated
to Zeus Xenios and Zeus Olympios, and that at
Jerusalem befouled with the rites of the Syrian
Ashtoreth.
</p>

<p>
Thousands of the orthodox Jews fled to Egypt,
where they found shelter and welcome. Among
them was Onias, the eldest son of Onias <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii</hi>. Philomêtor
granted him land in the nome of Heliopolis,
and allowed him to build there a temple in which
the worship of the Hebrew God should be carried
on as it had been at Jerusalem. Excavation goes
to show that the temple was erected at the spot
now called Tel el-Yehudîyeh, <q>the Mound of the
Jewess,</q> not far from Shibîn el-Kanâtir. Here was
an old deserted palace and temple of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>,
and here the Jews were permitted to establish themselves
and found a city, which they called Onion.
</p>

<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>

<p>
According to Josephus, its older name had been
Leontopolis. The temple, which was destroyed by
Vespasian after the Jewish war, was fortified like
that at Jerusalem, and the porcelain plaques enamelled
with rosettes and lotus-buds, which had been
made for Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, were employed once more to
ornament it. Long ago the <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> discovered
among its ruins, and then broke up, a marble bath,
such as is used to-day by the Jewish women for
the purpose of purification, and in the adjoining
necropolis Dr. Naville found the tombs of persons
who bore Jewish names. Onias was not allowed
to build his new temple without a protest from the
stricter adherents of the Law that it was forbidden
to raise one elsewhere than in the sacred city of
David. But he was a man of ready resource, and
all opposition was overcome when he pointed to the
prophecy of Isaiah (xix. 19): <q>In that day there
shall be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the
land of Egypt.</q> The Egyptian Jews had already
secured their own version of the Scriptures; they
now had their own temple, their own priesthood,
and their own high-priest. True, their co-religionists
in Judæa never ceased to protest against this rival
centre of their religious faith, and to denounce Onias
as the first schismatic; but their brethren in Egypt
paid no attention to their words, and the temple
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
of Onion continued to exist as long as that of
Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
Onias exercised an influence not only over his
own countrymen, but over the mind of the king as
well. Philomêtor, like Euergetês, had Jewish leanings,
and the high-priest of Onion was admitted to
high offices of state. So also was Dositheus, <q>the
priest and Levite,</q> who, in <q>The Rest of the Chapters
of the Book of Esther</q> (x. 1), tells us that in the
fourth year of Philomêtor, he and his son Ptolemy
had brought to Egypt <q>this epistle of Phurim,</q> which
had been translated into Greek at Jerusalem by
Lysimachus, the son of Ptolemy. Philomêtor even
acted as a judge in the great religious controversy
which raged between the Jews and the Samaritans.
They called upon him to decide whether the temple
should have been built on Mount Moriah or Mount
Gerizim, and which of them had altered the text of
Deuteronomy xxvii. 12, 13. Philomêtor decided in
favour of the Jews, as his duty towards his numerous
Jewish subjects perhaps compelled him to do, and
his religious zeal even carried him so far as to order
the two unsuccessful advocates of the Samaritan
cause to be put to death.
</p>

<p>
While the king of Egypt was thus acting like
a Jew, the king of Syria was engaged in a fierce
struggle with the Jewish people. The national party
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
had risen under Mattathias, the priest of Modin,
and his five sons, of whom the third, Judas Maccabæus,
was the ablest and best-known. One after
another the Syrian armies were overthrown, and in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 165 the Temple was purified and repaired, and
a new altar dedicated in it to the Lord of Hosts.
Two years later Antiochus Epiphanês died while
on the march against Judæa, and with him died
also the power of Syria. Rival claimants for the
throne, internal and external discord, treachery and
murder, sapped the foundations of its strength, and
in spite of assassinations and religious quarrels, of
Edomite hostility and the efforts of the Hellenising
party among the Jews themselves, the power of the
Maccabees went on increasing. The high-priesthood
passed to them from the last of the sympathisers
with the Greeks, and Jonathan, the brother and
successor of Judas, was treated by the king of Syria
with royal honours. Treaties were made with Sparta
and Rome, and his successor, Simon, struck coins
of his own. After his murder his son John Hyrcanus
extended the Jewish dominion as far north
as Damascus, annihilating Samaria and its temples
and conquering the Edomites, whom he compelled
to accept the Jewish faith. Aristobulus, who followed
him, took the title of king, and added Ituræa to
his kingdom, while his brother Alexander Jannæus
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
attacked Egypt and annexed the cities of the
Phœnician coast. But with royal dignity had come
royal crimes. Both Aristobulus and Alexander had
murdered their brothers, and their Greek names show
how the champions of Jewish orthodoxy were passing
over into the camp of the foe.
</p>

<p>
Long before all this happened, many changes
had fallen upon Egypt. Philomêtor died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 145.
He had been weak enough to forgive his rebellious
and ungrateful brother twice when he had had him
in his power. Once he had been compelled to go
to Rome to plead his cause before the senate, and
there be indebted to an Alexandrine painter for food
and lodging; on the second occasion Physkôn had
endeavoured to rob him of Cyprus by a combination
of mean treachery and intrigue.
</p>

<p>
The reward of his brotherly forbearance was the
murder by Physkôn of Philomêtor's young son
Ptolemy Philopator <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> immediately after his death.
Onias, the Jewish high-priest, held Alexandria for
Philopator, but his uncle Physkôn was favoured by
the Romans, whose word was now law. Physkôn
accordingly began his long reign of vice and cruelty,
interrupted only by temporary banishment to Cyprus.
Then followed his widow, Cleopatra Kokkê, a woman
stained with every possible and impossible crime.
She held her own, however, against all opponents,
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
including her own son Ptolemy Lathyrus, thanks
to her two Jewish generals, Khelkias and Ananias,
the sons of the high-priest Onias. Palestine and
Syria again became a battle-field where the fate of
Egypt was decided, and while Cleopatra was aided
by the Jews, Lathyrus found his allies among the
Samaritans.
</p>

<p>
It was in the midst of these wars and rumours of
wars, when men had lost faith in one another and
themselves, and when the Jews after struggling for
bare existence were beginning to treat on equal terms
with the great monarchies of the world, that that
curious Apocalypse, the Book of Enoch, seems to
have been composed, at all events in its original
form. It is a vision of the end of all things and the
judgment of mankind, and it embodies the fully developed
doctrine of the angelic hierarchy to which
reference is made in the Book of Daniel.
</p>

<p>
Cleopatra was murdered by her younger and
favourite son, and Lathyrus succeeded after all in
obtaining the throne of Egypt, which he ascended
under the title of Sôtêr <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 87). His short reign
of six years was signalised by the destruction of
Thebes. Upper Egypt was still in a state of effervescing
discontent, and the crimes of the last reign
caused it to break into open rebellion. The government
was weak and wicked; the Greeks had lost
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
their vigour and power to rule, and their armies were
now mere bodies of unruly mercenaries. But the
Thebans were not wealthy or strong enough to withstand
Alexandria when helped by the resources of
the Mediterranean. The revolt was at last suppressed,
Thebes taken by storm, and its temples,
which had been used as fortresses, battered and destroyed.
The population was put to the sword or
carried into slavery, and the capital of the conquering
Pharaohs of the past ceased to exist. Its place was
taken by a few squalid villages which clustered round
the ruins of its ancient shrines. Karnak and Luxor,
Medinêt Habu and Qurnah, were all that remained of
the former city. Under the earlier Ptolemies it had
been known as Diospolis, <q>the city of Zeus</q> Amon, the
metropolis of Upper Egypt; from this time forward,
in the receipts of the tax-gatherers, it is nothing more
than a collection of <q>villages.</q> Its priests were
scattered, its ruined temples left to decay. What
the Assyrian had failed to destroy and the Persian
had spared was overthrown by a Ptolemy who called
himself a king of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
After the death of Lathyrus the internal decay of
the monarchy went on rapidly. A prey to civil war
and usurpation, it was allowed to exist a little longer
by the contemptuous forbearance of the Romans, who
waited to put an end to it until they had drained it
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
of its treasures. The kingdom of the Asmonæans at
Jerusalem also had tottered to its fall. Family
murders and civil feuds had become almost as
common among them as among the Ptolemies, and
as in Egypt, so too in Palestine, Rome was called in
to mediate between the rival claimants for the crown.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 63 Jerusalem was captured by Pompey after
a three months' siege, its defenders massacred, its
fortifications destroyed, and its royal house abolished.
The Roman victor entered the Holy of Holies, and
Palestine was annexed to the Roman empire.
</p>

<p>
Among the remnant which still retained the faith
of their forefathers the Roman conquest and the
profanation of the temple gave new strength to the
conviction that the Messiah and saviour of Israel
must surely soon appear. The conviction finds expression
in the so-called Psalms of Solomon, of which
only a Greek copy survives. The high hopes raised
by the successes of the Maccabean family were
dashed for ever, and the temporal power of Judah
had vanished away. Henceforth it existed as a
nation only on sufferance.
</p>

<p>
In Egypt it was not long before the Jews discovered
how grievous had been the change in their
fortunes. They ceased to be feared, and therefore
respected: the mob and rulers of Alexandria had for
them now only hatred and contempt. Their citizenship
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
was taken away, with its right to the enjoyment
of their own magistrates and courts of justice, and
they were degraded to the rank of the native
Egyptians, whom the lowest Greek vagabond in the
streets of Alexandria could maltreat with impunity.
They did not recover their old privileges until
Augustus had reorganised his Egyptian province,
and though they were again deprived of them by
Caligula, when Philo went in vain to plead for his
countrymen before the emperor, they were restored
by Claudius, and even Vespasian after the Jewish
war did not interfere with them.
</p>

<p>
The house of Ptolemy fell ignobly. But it fell
amid the convulsions of a civil war which rent the
empire of its conquerors to the foundation, and among
the ruins of the Roman republic. Cleopatra, its last
representative, bewitched not only the coarser Mark
Antony but even the master mind of Julius Cæsar.
Her charms were fatal to the life and reputation of
the one; they nearly proved equally fatal to the life of
the other. Besieged with her in the palace of the
Ptolemies by the Alexandrine mob, Cæsar's life
trembled for a while in the balance. But the Library
of Alexandria was given in its stead; he saved himself
by firing the docks and shipping, and the flames
spread from the harbour to the halls of the Museum.
The precious papyri perished in the flames, and the
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
rooms in which the learning and talent of the Greek
world had been gathered together were a heap of
blackened ruins. It is true that Cleopatra subsequently
obtained from Mark Antony the library of
Pergamos, with its 200,000 volumes, which she placed
in the temple of Serapis, but the new library never
equalled the old, either in its extent or in the value
of its books.
</p>

<p>
Cleopatra and Mark Antony died by their own
hands, and Augustus was left master of Egypt and
the Roman world (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 30). Cæsarion, the son of
Cleopatra and Julius Cæsar, was put to death, and
Egypt was annexed to the emperor's privy purse.
It never, therefore, became a province of the Roman
empire: unhappily for its inhabitants, it remained the
emperor's private domain. Its prefect was never
allowed to be of higher rank than the equestrian
order, and a senator was forbidden to set foot in it.
Its cities could not govern themselves, and the old
Greek law, which restricted the rights of citizenship
to the Greeks and Jews and prevented any native
Egyptians from sharing them, was left in force.
Egypt was the granary of Rome, and the riches of
its soil and the industry of its inhabitants made it
needful that no rival to the reigning sovereign should
establish himself in it. History had shown with what
ease the country could be invaded and occupied and
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
with what difficulty the occupier could be driven out.
And the master of Egypt commanded the trade between
East and West; he commanded also the
Roman mob whose mouths were filled with Egyptian
corn. It was dangerous to allow a possible rival even
to visit the valley of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
The history of Alexandria under the Romans
is the history of Alexandria rather than of the
Egyptians. The <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> laboured for others, not for
themselves, and the burdens which weighed upon
them became ever greater and more intolerable.
Now and again there were outbreaks in Upper Egypt,
which were, however, quickly repressed, and in the
third century the barbarian Blemmyes made Coptos
and Ptolemais their capitals. The reconquest of the
Thebaid by Probus (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 280) was judged worthy of
a triumph. About eight years later the whole country
was once more in rebellion, and proclaimed their
leader Akhilleus emperor. The war lasted for nine
years, and the whole force of the empire was required
to finish it. The emperor Diocletian marched in
person into Upper Egypt and besieged Coptos, the
centre of the revolt. After a long siege the city was
taken and razed to the ground. But the war had
ruined the people. The embankments were broken,
the canals choked up, the fields untilled and overrun
by the barbarians from the Sûdan or the Bedouin of
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
the eastern desert. Diocletian, when the struggle
was over, found himself obliged to withdraw the
Roman garrisons south of the First Cataract, and to
fix the frontier of the empire at Assuan.
</p>

<p>
The war was followed by the great persecution of
the Christians, the last expiring effort of Roman
paganism against the invasion of the new faith.
Christianity had become a mighty power in the
Roman world, which threatened soon to absorb all
that was left of the Rome of the past, with its
patriotism, its devotion to the emperor, its law and
its administration. The struggle between it and the
empire of Augustus could no longer be delayed.
The edict of Diocletian was signed, and the empire
put forth its whole strength to crush its rival and root
Christianity out of its midst.
</p>

<p>
But the attempt came too late. The new power
was stronger than the old one, and the persecution
only proved how utterly the old Rome had passed
away. The empire bowed its head and became
Christian; the bishops took the place of the prefects
and senators of the past, and theological disputations
raged in the halls of philosophy. Nowhere had the
persecution been fiercer than in Egypt; nowhere had
the martyrs and confessors of the Church been more
heroic or more numerous.
</p>

<p>
The result was one which we should hardly have
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
expected. Hitherto Christianity in Egypt had been
Greek. It was associated with Alexandria and the
Greek language, not with the villages and tongue of
the people. Its bishops and theologians were Greeks,
and the school of Christian Platonism which flourished
in Alexandria had little in common with Egyptian
ideas. With the Diocletian persecution, however,
came a change. Even while it was still at its height,
martyrs and confessors come forward who bear
Egyptian and not Greek names. Hardly is it over
before the native population joins in one great body
the new religion. Osiris and Isis make way for
Christ and the Blessed Virgin, the Coptic alphabet
replaces the demotic script of heathenism, and the
bodies of the dead cease to be embalmed. It is
difficult to account for the suddenness and completeness
of the change. The decay of the Roman power,
and therewith the barriers between Greek and
Egyptian, may have had something to do with it.
So too may the revolt in Upper Egypt, which
united in one common feeling of nationality all the
elements of the population. Perhaps a still more
potent cause was the spectacle of the heroism and
constancy of those who suffered for the Christian
faith. The Egyptian has always been deeply
religious, and his very enjoyment of life makes him
admire and revere the ascetic. But whatever may
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
have been the reason, the fact remains: before the
persecution of Diocletian Egyptian Christianity had
been Greek; when the persecution was over it had
become Copt. The pagans who still survived were
not Egyptians but the rich and highly-educated
Greeks, like the poet Nonnus, who was tortured to
death by St. Shnûdi, or the gifted Hypatia, whose
flesh was torn from her bones with oyster-shells by
the monks of St. Cyril.
</p>

<p>
The literature of Coptic Christianity was almost
wholly religious. Little else had an interest for the
devoted adherents of the new faith. The romances
which had delighted their forefathers were replaced
by legends of the saints and martyrs, and Christian
hymns succeeded to the poems of the past. We owe
to this passion for theology the preservation of
productions of the Jewish and Christian Churches
which would otherwise have been lost. The Book of
Enoch, quoted though it is by St. Jude, would have
perished irrevocably had it not been for Coptic
Christianity. The Church of Abyssinia, a daughter
of that of Egypt, has preserved it in an Ethiopic
translation, and portions of the Greek original from
which the translation was made have been found in a
tomb at Ekhmîm, which was excavated in 1886. It
has long been known that the text used by the
Abyssinian translator must have differed considerably
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
from that of which extracts have been preserved
for us in the Epistle of St. Jude and the writings
of the Byzantine historians Kedrenos and George
the Syncellus; the newly-discovered fragments
now enable us to see what this text actually was
like. If the original book was written in Aramaic
it would seem that at least two authorised
Greek versions of it existed, one of which was
used in Europe and Syria, the other in Egypt.
Which was the older and more faithful we have yet
to learn.
</p>

<p>
The excavations at Ekhmîm have brought to
light fragments of two other works, both belonging
to the early days of Christianity and long since
lost. One of these is supposed by its first editor,
M. Bouriant, to be the Apocalypse of St. Peter; it
opens with an account of the Transfiguration, which
is followed by a vision of heaven and hell. The
book appears to have been composed or interpolated
by a Gnostic, as there is a reference in it to <q>the Æon</q>
in which Moses and Elias dwelt in glory. The other
work is of more importance. It is the Gospel known
to the early Church as that of St. Peter, and the
portion which is preserved contains the narrative of the
Passion and Resurrection of Christ. Throughout the
narrative the responsibility for the death of our Lord
is transferred from Pilate to the Jews; when the
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
guard who watched the tomb under the centurion
Petronius ran to tell Pilate of the resurrection they
had witnessed, <q>grieving greatly and saying: Truly
he was the son of God</q>: he answered: <q>I am clean
of the blood of the son of God: I too thought he was
so.</q> Docetic tendencies, however, are observable in
the Gospel: at all events the cry of Christ on the
cross is rendered, <q>My power, (my) power, thou hast
forsaken me!</q>
</p>

<p>
What further discoveries of the lost documents of
early Christianity still await us in Egypt it is impossible
to say. It is only during the last few years
that attention has been turned towards monuments
which, to the students of Egyptian antiquity, seemed
of too recent a date. Countless manuscripts of priceless
value have already perished through the
ignorance of the <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> and the neglect of the
tourist and <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>savan</foreign>, to whom the term <q>Coptic</q> has
been synonymous with <q>worthless.</q> But the soil of
Egypt is archæologically almost inexhaustible, and
the land of the Septuagint, of the Christian school of
Alexandria, and of the passionate theology of a later
epoch, cannot fail to yield up other documents that
will throw a flood of light on the early history of our
faith. It is only the other day that, among the
Fayyûm papyri now in the British Museum, there
was found a fragment of the Septuagint version of
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
the Psalms older than the oldest <hi rend='smallcaps'>ms.</hi> of the Bible
hitherto known. And the traveller who still wishes
to see the Nile at leisure and in his own way will
find in the old Egyptian quarries behind Dêr Abu
Hannes, but a little to the south of the city which
Hadrian raised to the memory of Antinous, abundant
illustrations of the doctrine and worship of the
primitive Coptic Church. He can there study all the
details of its ancient ecclesiastical architecture cut out
of the living rock, and can trace how the home of a
hermit became first a place of pilgrimage and then a
chapel with its altar to the saints. The tombs themselves,
inscribed with the Greek epitaphs of the sainted
fugitives from persecution, still exist outside the caves
in which they had dwelt. We can even see the change
taking place which transformed the Greek Church of
Alexandria into the Coptic Church of Egypt. On
either side of a richly-carved cross is the record of
<q>Papias, son of Melito the Isaurian,</q> buried in the
spot made holy by the body of St. Macarius, which is
written on the one side in Greek, on the other side in
Coptic. Henceforward Greek is superseded by Coptic,
and the numerous pilgrims who ask St. Victor or
St. Phœbammon to pray for them write their names
and prayers in the native language and the native
alphabet. With the betrayal of Egypt to the
Mohammedans by George the Makaukas the doom
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
of the Greek language and Bible was sealed. Coptic
had already become the language of the Egyptian
Church, and though we still find quotations from the
Greek New Testament painted here and there on the
walls of rock-cut shrines they are little more than
ornamental designs. Christian Egypt is native, not
Greek.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Herodotos In Egypt.</head>

<p>
From Coptic Christianity, just preparing to confront
twelve centuries of Mohammedan persecution,
we must now turn back to Pagan Greece. The
Persian wars have breathed a new life into Greece
and its colonies, and given them a feeling of unity
such as they never possessed before. Athens has
taken its place as leader not only in art and literature,
but also in war, and under the shelter of her
name the Ionians of Asia Minor have ventured to
defy their Persian lord, and the Ionic dialect has
ceased to be an object of contempt. The Greek,
always restless and curious to see and hear <q>some
new thing,</q> is now beginning to indulge his tastes at
leisure, and to visit as a tourist the foreign shores of
the Mediterranean. Art has leaped at a single bound
to its perfection in the sculptures of Pheidias; poetry
has become divine in the tragedies of Æschylus and
Sophocles, and history is preparing to take part in
the general development. The modern world of
Europe is already born.
</p>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<p>
The founder of literary history&mdash;of history, that is
to say, which aims at literary form and interest&mdash;was
Herodotos of Halikarnassos. If Greek tradition may
be trusted, his uncle had been put to death by
Lygdamis, the despot of the city, and the subsequent
expulsion of the tyrant was in some measure due to
the political zeal of the future historian. Herodotos
was wealthy and well educated, as fond of travel as
the majority of his countrymen, and not behind them
in curiosity and vanity. He had cultivated the
literary dialect of Ionia, perhaps during his stay in
Samos, and had made good use there of the library
of Polykratês, the friend and correspondent of Amasis.
What other libraries he may have consulted we do
not know, but his history shows that he had a considerable
acquaintance with the works of his predecessors,
whom he desired to eclipse and supersede.
Hekatæus of Miletus, who had travelled in Egypt as
far south as Thebes, if not Assuan, and had written
a full account of the country, its people and its
history, Xanthus, the Lydian, who had compiled the
annals of his native land, beside numberless other
authors, historians and geographers, poets and
dramatists, philosophers and physicists, had been
made to contribute to his work. Now and again
he refers to the older historians when he wishes to
correct or contradict them; more frequently he
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
silently incorporates their statements and words without
mentioning them by name. It was thus, we are
told by Porphyry, that he <q>stole</q> the accounts given
by Hekatæus of the crocodile, the hippopotamus and
the phœnix, and the incorrectness of his description
of that marvellous bird, which, like Hekatæus, he
likens to an eagle, proves that the charge is correct.
Reviewers did not exist in his days, nor were marks
of quotation or even footnotes as yet invented, and
Herodotos might therefore plead that, although he
quoted freely without acknowledgment, he was not
in any real sense a plagiarist. He only acted like
other Greek writers of his time, and if his plagiarisms
exceeded theirs it was only because he had read
more and made a more diligent use of his note-book.
</p>

<p>
It is we, and not the Greek world for which he
wrote, who are the sufferers. It is frequently difficult,
if not impossible, for us to tell whether Herodotos
is speaking from his own experience or quoting from
others, whose trustworthiness is doubtful or whose
statements may have been misunderstood. From
time to time internal evidence assures us that we are
dealing, not with Herodotos himself, but with some
other writer whose remarks he has embodied. His
commentators have continually argued on the supposition
that, wherever the first person is used, it is
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
Herodotos himself who is speaking. Statements of
his accordingly have been declared to be true, in
spite of the contrary evidence of oriental research,
because, it is urged, he is a trustworthy witness and
has reported honestly what he heard and saw. But
if he did not hear and see the supposed facts, the
case is altered and the argument falls to the ground.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos took part in the foundation of the
colony of Thurii in southern Italy in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 445, and
there, rather than at the Olympic festival, as later
legend believed, he read to the assembled Greeks the
whole or a part of his history. His travels in Egypt,
therefore, must have already taken place. Their approximate
date, indeed, is fixed by what he tells us
about the battlefield of Paprêmis (iii. 12).
</p>

<p>
At Paprêmis, for the first time, an Egyptian
army defeated the Persian forces. Its leader was
Inarôs the Libyan, and doubtless a large body of
Libyans was enrolled in it. Along with Amyrtæos he
had led the Egyptians to revolt in the fifth year of
the reign of Artaxerxes <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 460). Akhæmenes,
the satrap of Egypt, was routed and slain, and for
six years Egypt maintained a precarious freedom.
The fortresses at Memphis and Pelusium, however,
remained in the hands of the Persians, and in spite of
all the efforts of the Egyptians, they could not be
dislodged. Greek aid accordingly was sought, and
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
the Athenians, still at war with Persia, sent two
hundred ships from Cyprus to the help of the insurgents.
The ships sailed up the Nile as far as
Memphis, where the Persian garrison still held out.
</p>

<p>
All attempts to oust it proved unavailing, and the
approach of a great Persian army under Megabyzos
obliged the Greeks to retreat to the island of Prosopites.
Here they were blockaded for a year and a
half; then the besiegers turned the river aside and
marched over its dry bed against the camp of the
allies, which they took by storm. The Greek
expedition was annihilated, and Inarôs fell into the
hands of his enemies, who sent him to Persia and
there impaled him. Amyrtæos, however, still maintained
himself in the marshes of the Delta, and in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 449 Kimon sent sixty ships of the Athenian
fleet to assist him in the struggle. But before they
could reach the coast of Egypt news arrived of the
death of Kimon, and the ships returned home. Four
years later, if we may trust Philokhorus, another
Egyptian prince, Psammetikhos, who seems to have
succeeded Amyrtæos, sent 72,000 bushels of wheat to
Athens in the hope of buying therewith Athenian
help. But it does not appear to have been given,
and Egypt once more sullenly obeyed the Persian
rule. We learn from Herodotos (iii. 15) that <q>the
great king</q> even allowed Thannyras and Pausiris,
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
the sons of his inveterate enemies Inarôs and
Amyrtæos, to succeed to the principalities of their
fathers.
</p>

<p>
Paprêmis was visited by Herodotos, and he saw
there the sham fight between the priests at the door
of the temple on the occasion of their chief festival.
He also went to the site of the battle-field, and there
beheld <q>a great marvel.</q> The skeletons of the combatants
lay on separate sides of the field just as they
had fallen, and whereas the skulls of the Persians were
so thin that they could be shattered by a pebble, those
of the Egyptians were thick and strong enough to
resist being battered with a stone. The cause of this
difference was explained to him by the dragoman:
the Egyptians shaved their heads from childhood
and so hardened the bones of it against the sun,
while the Persians shaded their heads by constantly
wearing caps of thick felt.
</p>

<p>
Not many years could have elapsed since the battle
had occurred. The visit of the Greek traveller to the
scene of it may therefore be laid between <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 455
and 450. The patriots of Egypt must have been
still struggling for their liberty among the marshes
of the northern Delta.
</p>

<p>
But the rebellion must have been practically
crushed. No Greek could have ventured into Persian
territory while his countrymen were fighting against
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
its Persian masters. The army of Megabyzos must
have done its work, and the Athenian fleet been
utterly destroyed. Moreover, it is evident that when
Herodotos entered the valley of the Nile the country
was at peace. His references to the war are to a past
event, and when he speaks of Inarôs and Amyrtæos
it is of men who have ceased to be a danger to the
foreign government. The passage, indeed, in which
he notices the peaceable appointment of their sons to
the principalities of their fathers may have been
inserted after his return to Greek lands, but this
makes no difference as to the main fact. When he
came to Egypt it had again lapsed into tranquil
submission to the Persian power.
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 450, Kimon, the son of Miltiades, had destroyed
the naval power of Persia, and in the following
year Megabyzos was overthrown at Salamis.
It was then that the <q>peace of Kimon</q> is said to
have been concluded between Athens and the
Persian king, which put an end to the long Persian
war, freed the Greek cities of Asia, and made the
Mediterranean a Greek sea. The reality of the peace
has been doubted, because there is no allusion to it
in the pages of Thucydides, and it may be that it was
never formally drawn up. But the fact embodied by the
story remains: for many years to come there was truce
between Greece and Persia, and the independence
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
of the Greek colonies in Asia Minor was acknowledged
at the Persian court. The year 449 marks
the final triumph of Athens and the beginning of
Persian decline.
</p>

<p>
Had Herodotos travelled in Egypt a year or two
later, the ease and security with which he did so
would be readily explained. But in this case we
should be brought too near the time when his history
was finished and he himself was a resident in Italy.
We must therefore believe that he was there before
the final blow had been struck at Persian supremacy
in the Mediterranean, but when the Athenian invasion
of Egypt was already a thing of the past, and the
unarmed trader and tourist were once more able to
move freely about.
</p>

<p>
For more than half a century Egypt had been
closed to Greek curiosity. There had been an earlier
period, when the Delta at least had been well-known
to the Hellenic world. The Pharos of the future
Alexandria is already mentioned by Homer (<hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> iv.
355); it was there, <q>in front of Egypt,</q> that Menelaos
moored his ships and forced <q>Egyptian Prôteus</q> to
declare to him his homeward road. Even <q>Egyptian
Thebes,</q> with its hundred temple-gates, is known both
to the <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> (ix. 381) and to the <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> (iv. 126), and
the Pharaoh Polybos dwelt there when Alkandra, his
wife, loaded Menelaos with gifts. Greek mercenaries
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
enabled Psammetikhos to shake off the yoke of
Assyria, and Greek traders made Naukratis and
Daphnæ wealthy centres of commerce. Solon visited
Egypt while Athens was putting into practice the
laws he had promulgated, and there he heard from
the priest of Sais that, by the side of the unnumbered
centuries of Egyptian culture, the Greeks were but
children and their wisdom but the growth of to-day.
Before the Ionic revolt had broken out, while Ionia
and Egypt were still sister provinces of the same
Persian empire, Hekatæos of Miletus had travelled
through the valley of the Nile, enjoying advantages
for information which no Greek could possess again
till Egypt had become a Macedonian conquest, and
embodying his knowledge and experiences in a
lengthy book.
</p>

<p>
But the Persian wars had put an end to all this
peaceful intercourse between Greece and the old land
of the Pharaohs, and the Karian dragomen who had
made their living by acting as interpreters between
the Greeks and the Egyptians were forced to turn to
other work. At length, however, Egypt was once
more open to visitors, and once more, therefore,
visitors came from Greece. Anaxagoras, the philosopher
and friend of Periklês, was among the first to
arrive and to investigate the causes of the rise and
fall of the Nile. Hellanikos the historian, too, the
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
older contemporary of Herodotos, seems to have
travelled in Egypt, though doubt has been cast on
the authenticity of the works in which he is supposed
to have recorded his experiences of Egyptian travel.
At any rate, Herodotos found a public fresh and eager
to hear what he had to tell them about the dwellers
on the Nile.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos must have reached Egypt in the summer.
When he arrived, the whole of the Delta was
under water. He describes with the vividness of an
eye-witness how its towns appeared above the
surface of the water, like the islands in the Ægean,
and how the traveller could sail, not along the river,
but across the plain. At the time of the inundation,
he says, all Egypt <q>becomes a sea, above which the
villages alone show themselves.</q> The voyage from
Naukratis to Memphis was direct and rapid, and the
tourists in making it passed by the pyramids instead
of the apex of the Delta.
</p>

<p>
In northern Egypt the rise of the Nile begins to
be perceptible during the first few days of July.
Criers go about the streets of Cairo announcing each
day how high it has risen, and in the first or second
week of August the ceremony of cutting the Khalîg
or Canal of Cairo, and therewith declaring that the
Nile was once more flooding its banks, used to be
observed with great rejoicings. It is, in fact, in
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
August that the land is first covered with the flood.
For another month the height of the water continues
to increase, and then for a short while to remain
stationary. But towards the end of October, when
the canals of Upper Egypt are emptied, there is
again another rise, soon followed by a rapid fall. If
the Delta was like a sea when Herodotos saw it, he
must have been there between the beginning of July
and the end of October.
</p>

<p>
These are the limits of the time which he could
have spent in the country. That he did not remain
till after the fall of the river and the drying up of
the land is evident from incidental statements in his
work. Thus when he visited the Fayyûm it was
like the Delta, a sea of waters, and the pyramids
of Biahmu, which Professor Petrie's excavations
have shown to have always stood on dry land,
as they still do to-day, were seen by him in the
middle of a vast lake. Nowhere, indeed, is there any
hint of his having seen the country in its normal
condition. Even his reference to Kerkosôros, at the
apex of the Delta, which every traveller to Memphis
had to pass except at the period of high Nile, is derived
from <q>the Ionian</q> writers of a previous generation,
not from his own experience. Neither in going
nor in returning was his boat obliged to pass that
way. We need not be surprised, therefore, at finding
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
that the festivals he witnessed in the Egyptian towns
were those which took place in the summer.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos had not the time to imitate the example
of his predecessor Hekatæos and visit Upper
Egypt, nor, indeed, was the summer a fitting season
for doing so. Consequently, while he lavishes his
admiration on the temples and pyramids of the Delta,
of Memphis and of the Fayyûm, he has nothing to
say about the still more striking temples of the south.
<q>Hundred-gated Thebes,</q> whose fame had already
penetrated to the Homeric Greeks, and whose tombs
and colossi led the Greek tourists of the Macedonian
age to scribble upon them their expressions of admiration
and awe, is known to him only by name.
The extravagance of his praise is reserved for the
Labyrinth; about the nobler and more majestic
buildings of the capital of Upper Egypt he is absolutely
silent. Against the statues of the Egyptian
kings which Hekatæos saw at Thebes, Herodotos
can bring only a smaller number which he saw at
Memphis.
</p>

<p>
The monuments even now contain evidence that,
after the age of Hekatæos, Greek sightseers did not
make their way into southern Egypt until the
Macedonian conquest had made travel there easy and
safe. At Abu-Simbel in Nubia and Abydos in Upper
Egypt are the records of the Greek mercenaries
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
of Psammetikhos and their Greek and Karian
contemporaries who visited the oracle of Abydos.
But then comes a long blank in the history of
Greek writing in Egypt. With the foundation of
Alexander's empire a new epoch in it begins. From
that time forward the walls of the tombs and temples
were covered with the scrawls of innumerable Greek
visitors. At Thebes the royal tombs were especial
objects of attention, and ciceroni led the inquisitive
stranger round them just as they do to-day.
</p>

<p>
But among all the mass of Greek names that
have been collected from the monuments of Upper
Egypt we find neither that of Herodotos nor of any
other of his countrymen of the same age. In fact,
it was not a time for sightseeing in the southern
valley of the Nile. The population were in only half-repressed
rebellion against their Persian rulers, and
the whole country swarmed with bandits. Persian
authority was necessarily weaker than in the north,
and the people were more combative and had near
allies in the desert, the Bedouin and the Ethiopians.
A voyage up the river was even more dangerous
than in the anarchical days of the last century:
pirates abounded, and out of reach of the Persian
garrison at Memphis the traveller carried his life in
his hand. As in the time of Norden no Egyptian
bey could or would allow the traveller in Nubia to
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
go south of Dirr, so in the time of Herodotos the
southern limit of the foreigner's travels was the
Fayyûm. The <q>Egypt into which Greeks sail</q> was, as
he himself declares, the Egypt which lay north of the
Theban nome and Lake Mœris.
</p>

<p>
Even a visit to the Fayyûm was doubtless a bold
and unusual undertaking, and on this account
Herodotos describes what he saw there at more than
ordinary length, and extols the wonders of the
district at the expense of the better-known monuments
of Memphis and the Delta. But the Oasis
had suffered much from the civil troubles which had
afflicted Egypt. The dykes which kept out the
inundation had been neglected, and the fertile nome
was transformed into a stagnant lake. Herodotos
saw it as the French <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>savans</foreign> saw it at the beginning
of the present century; the embankments were
broken, and fields and roads were alike submerged.
</p>

<p>
From the walls of the capital of the province,
whose mounds now lie outside Medînet el-Fayyûm,
Herodotos looked northward over a vast expanse of
water. <q>Nearly in the middle of it,</q> he tells us, <q>stand
two pyramids, each of them rising 304 feet above
the water ... and both surmounted by colossal
stone figures seated upon a throne.</q> The shattered
fragments of the colossi were found by Professor
Petrie in 1888, scattered round the pyramidal
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
pedestals, twenty-one feet high, on which they had
been placed. Cut out of hard quartzite sandstone,
they represented Amon-em-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, the creator of the
Fayyûm, and their discoverer calculates that they
were each thirty-five feet in height. The fragments
are now at Oxford in the Ashmolean Museum. The
statues faced northward, and the court within which
they stood was surrounded by a wall with a gateway
of red granite. The pedestals still remain fairly
intact, and the road by the side of which they had
been erected is still used to-day. The monuments,
in fact, were erected high above the inundation, and
that Herodotos should have seen them in the midst of
the water is but a further proof of the condition of the
country at the time. The Lake Mœris he describes
was not the true Mœris of Egyptian geography; it
was the Fayyûm itself buried beneath the flood.
</p>

<p>
The total height of the colossi from the ground,
according to Professor Petrie, was about sixty feet.
Between this and the 304 feet assigned to them by
the Greek traveller there is indeed a wide difference.
But Herodotos could not have seen them close at
hand, and the measurement he gives must have been
a mere guess. It warns us, however, not to put overmuch
faith in his statements, even when they are the
results of personal observation. He was but a tourist,
not a man of science, and he cared more for the tales
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
of his dragoman and novel sights than for scientific
surveying and exactitude.
</p>

<p>
Hence comes the assertion that before the time
of Menes the whole country between the sea and
Lake Mœris was a marsh. Such a statement is
intelligible only if we remember that, when Herodotos
sailed up the Nile, its banks were inundated on
either side. Had he seen the country south of
Memphis as the modern traveller sees it when the
water is subsiding and green fields begin to line the
course of the river, he could never have entertained
the belief. But all distinction between the Delta and
the rest of Egypt was hidden from him by the waters
of the inundation. That he should have made the
Fayyûm the limit of the marsh is indeed natural; it
was the limit of his exploration of Upper Egypt, and
consequently he did not know that from Memphis
southward to Edfu the valley of the Nile presents
the same features.
</p>

<p>
The strange error he twice commits in imagining
that there were vaults under the pyramid of Kheops
in an island formed by a canal which the builder had
introduced from the Nile is due to the same cause.
Doubtless his dragoman had told him something of
the kind. A subterraneous chamber in the rock
actually exists under the great pyramid, as was
discovered by Caviglia, and there are pyramids into
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
whose lower chambers the Nile has long since
infiltrated. Professor Maspero found his exploration
of the pyramids of Lisht, south of Dahshûr, stopped
by the water which had filled them, and Professor
Petrie had the same experience in the brick pyramid
of Howâra, though here the infiltration of the water
seems to have been caused by a canal dug in
Arab times. But the pyramids of Gizeh stand on a
plateau of limestone rock secure against the approach
of water, and the story reported by Herodotos is
more probably the result of misapprehension on his
own part than of intentional falsehood on the part of
his guides. His ready credence of it, however, can
be explained only by the condition of the country at
the time of his visit. The whole land was covered
with water, and in going to Memphis he had to sail
by the pyramids themselves. It was in a boat that
his visit to them must have been made; and it was
easy, therefore, to believe that a canal ran from the
water on which he sailed through the tunnelled rock
whereon they stood. He did not know that the
lowest chamber of the pyramid was high above the
utmost level of the flood.
</p>

<p>
Surprise has often been expressed that Herodotos
should make no mention of the Sphinx, which to
Arabs and modern Europeans alike has appeared
one of most noteworthy monuments of Gizeh. But
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
in sailing along the canal which led from Memphis
to the pyramids he would have passed by it without
notice. As his boat made its way to the rocky edge
on which the huge sepulchres of Kheops and
Khephren are built, it would have been concealed
from his view; and buried as it was in sand his
guides did not think it an object of such surpassing
importance as to lead him to it over the burning
sand. In the immediate neighbourhood of the
great pyramid he was surrounded by monuments
more interesting and more striking, which were quite
enough to occupy his day and satisfy his curiosity.
</p>

<p>
South of the Fayyûm and the adjoining city of
Herakleopolis, whose ruins are now known as Ahnas
el-Medîneh, all that Herodotos has to tell us is derived
from older authors. Now and then, it is true, the first
person is used, and we think for a moment that he is
describing his own adventures. But he is merely quoting
from others, and there are no marks of quotation
in the manuscript to show us that such is the case.
His book is thus like that of another and later Egyptian
traveller, Mr. J. A. St. John, whose <hi rend='italic'>Egypt and Nubia</hi>
was published in English only fifty years ago. He
too embodies the narratives of his predecessors in the
record of his own journey up the Nile without any
notice or signs that he is doing so, and it is not until
we suddenly light on the name of an earlier writer at
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
the bottom of the page that we become aware of the
fact. Herodotos has not given us even this help; and
we need not wonder, therefore, that commentators who
have never been in Egypt have been deceived by his
method of work. But he has preserved fragments of
older writers which would otherwise have been lost,
and if he has mingled them with the stories he heard
from the dragomen of Memphis and Sais, or the
answers he received to his questions about Greek
legends, we must not feel ungrateful.
</p>

<p>
Upper Egypt is mentioned only incidentally in
his narrative, and, as might be expected in a writer
who had to depend upon others for his information,
what he tells us about it is very frequently incorrect.
Thus he asserts that the hippopotamus was <q>sacred
in the nome of Paprêmis, but nowhere else in Egypt,</q>
although it was also worshipped in Thebes, and he
fancies that all the cats in the country were embalmed
and buried at Bubastis, all the hawks and
mice at Buto, and all the ibises at Hermopolis or
Damanhur. But this was because he had visited
these places and had not travelled in the south. Had
he done so, he would never have imagined that the
body of every cat or hawk that died was carried to a
distant place in the Delta. Indeed, in the hot
weather of the summer months, anything of the kind
would have been impossible. Cemeteries, however,
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
of these sacred animals are found all up and down the
Nile. The mummies of the sacred cats are to be met
with in the cliffs of Gebel Abu Foda, at Thebes, and
above all at Beni Hassan, where a little to the south
of the Speos Artemidos such quantities of them were
recently discovered as to suggest that a commercial
profit might be made out of their bones. Tons of
them were accordingly shipped to Liverpool, there
to be converted into manure; but as it was found
that the mummified bones refused to yield to the
process, the exportation ceased. Mummies of the
sacred hawks were disinterred in equal numbers when
the ancient cemeteries of Ekhmîm were excavated a
few years ago, and the construction of the canal on
the eastern bank opposite Abutîg has lately brought
to light another of their burial-places, thus fixing the
site of Hierakon, <q>the city of the Hawk,</q> the capital
of the twelfth nome.
</p>

<p>
In his geography of the river above the Fayyûm
Herodotos was similarly misinformed. Thus, he
avers that <q>the country above the Fayyûm for the
distance of a three days' voyage resembles the country
below it.</q> A three days' voyage would mean about
eighty miles, since he reckons it a voyage of seven
days from the sea to the Fayyûm, a distance of about
190 miles. Dahabîyeh travellers will willingly assent
to the calculation. With a fair wind, a day's voyage
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
is about thirty miles, more or less, so that 190 miles
could be easily traversed in seven days. Now eighty
miles would bring the visitor from the Fayyûm to
Qolosaneh and the Gebel et-Têr. For many miles
before reaching the Gebel the banks of the Nile wear
a very different aspect from that which they present
lower down. In place of a dull monotony of sand-banks
and level plains, there are picturesque lines of
cliff, amphitheatres of desert and rugged headlands.
It is only as far as Feshn, twenty miles to the south
of Herakleopolis, that the description of Herodotos
is correct. It is, in fact, merely based on what he
could see from the southernmost point to which
he attained.
</p>

<p>
The view which he had from thence over the flat
desert reaches of Libya led him to make another
statement equally wide of the truth. It is that for
four days after leaving Heliopolis the valley of the
Nile is narrow, but that then it once more becomes
broad. But such was the case only where the
Fayyûm and the province of Beni-Suef spread
towards the west, and there too only when they are
covered with the waters of the inundation. Elsewhere
the cultivated valley is for the most part
narrower even than in the neighbourhood of Memphis,
where it seemed to the Greek traveller to be so confined;
here and there, indeed, as at Abydos and
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
Thebes, it broadens out for a space, but otherwise
the wilderness encroaches upon it ever more and
more until at Silsilis the barren rocks obliterate it
altogether.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos knows nothing of the great monuments
of Thebes, and the Pharaohs accordingly whose
names he records have no connection with the ancient
capital of the empire. They belong to Memphis, to
the Fayyûm, and to the Delta&mdash;none of them to
Thebes. Even Sesostris, in whom some of the
features of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> may be detected, reigns in the
north rather than in the south. Of all the multitudinous
monuments that he has left, two only are
known to the Greek traveller, and these are the two
statues of himself which stood before the temple
of Ptah in Memphis.
</p>

<p>
Of Thothmes and Amenôphis and the other great
monarchs of the eighteenth dynasty whose memorials
were to be found chiefly in the south, Herodotos had
never heard. All that he knew of the kings of
Egypt before the age of Psammetikhos was derived
from the stories which his guides attached to the
monuments which he actually saw. Had he visited
the temples and tombs of Thebes and Abydos and
Assuan we should have been told how Memnon led
his troops to Troy or how Osymandyas conquered
the world. But we have to turn to others for the
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
dragoman's tales of Upper Egypt; Herodotos could
not record them, for he was never there. The
Fayyûm is the southernmost limit of his historical
knowledge, because it is also the southernmost limit
of his geographical knowledge.
</p>

<p>
And yet here and there we come across notices
of Upper Egypt, some of which have been written
by an eye-witness. But the eye-witness was not
Herodotos himself, and in giving them he generally
gives an indication of the fact. Thus he describes
Khemmis or Ekhmîm as <q>near Neapolis,</q> the modern
Qeneh, although the distance between the two towns
is really ninety-five miles, a voyage of at least three
days, and Neapolis was but an insignificant city by
the side of Khemmis itself, or of other towns like This
and Abydos that were nearer to it. Even Tentyris
or Denderah, with its ancient temple of Hathor
opposite Neapolis, was more important and better-known,
while Thebes itself was only forty-five miles
higher up the river.
</p>

<p>
But the account given by Herodotos of Khemmis
and its temple is a mere product of the imagination.
Indeed, he implies that he received it from certain
<q>people of Khemmis</q> whom he had questioned, probably
through his interpreter. They told him that the
temple, of which a few remains are still visible, and
which was really dedicated to Min or Amon-Khem,
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
was that of the Greek hero Perseus&mdash;a name suggested,
it may be, by its likeness to that of the sacred
persea tree. Each year, it was further alleged,
gymnastic games in the Greek fashion were celebrated
in honour of the foreign deity, who at times appeared
to his worshippers, leaving behind him his sandal
famous in Greek mythology. But the inventive
powers of the informants of the Greek traveller did
not stop here. He further assures us that the pylon
of the temple bore on the summits of its two towers
two images of the deity. The statement is of itself
sufficient to discredit the whole story and to prove
that Herodotos could never have seen the temple
with his own eyes. The watch-towers that guarded
the entrance of an Egyptian temple never had, and
never could have, images on their roofs. They were
needed for other purposes, and the very idea of their
supporting statues was contrary to the first principles
of Egyptian architecture and religion. It was a conception
wholly Greek.
</p>

<p>
Equally wide of the truth is what Herodotos has
to tell us about the First Cataract. Like other
travellers to Egypt before and since he was anxious
to learn something about the sources of the Nile.
But neither <q>the Egyptians nor the Libyans nor the
Greeks</q> whom he met could give him any information.
Perhaps had he sailed as far as Assuan some of the
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
Ethiopians who lived there might have been more
communicative. At last, however, he was introduced
to one of the sacred scribes in the temple of Neit at
Sais&mdash;the only Egyptian priest, in fact, of higher
rank, whom he seems to have conversed with&mdash;and
the scribe humoured the curiosity of the traveller to
the utmost of his desires, though even Herodotos
suspected that he was being made fun of. However,
as in duty bound, he gravely writes down what he was
told. <q>Two mountains are there with pointed tops,
between Syênê, a city of the Thebais, and Elephantinê,
which are called Krôphi and Môphi. Out of the
heart of these mountains flow the sources of the Nile,
which are bottomless, half the water running towards
Egypt and the north, while the other half goes to
Ethiopia and the south. That the sources are bottomless
was proved by Psammetikhos, the king of Egypt,
for after letting down into them a rope several
hundred thousand fathoms in length, he did not find
the bottom.</q> Herodotos adds that this was probably
because there were violent eddies in the water which
carried the rope away.
</p>

<p>
Egyptian priests did not, as a rule, know Greek,
and they avoided any kind of intercourse with the
<q>unclean</q> foreigner. Even to have conversed with
him would have caused pollution. Consequently
<q>the priests</q> to whom Herodotos so frequently
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
alludes were merely the <q>beadles</q> of the day, who
took the tourist over the temples and showed him
the principal objects of interest. The sacred scribe
of Sais was an exception to the general rule. Since
the days of Psammetikhos, Sais had been accustomed
to Greek visitors, and the prejudices against them
were less strong there than in other Egyptian towns.
It is quite possible, therefore, that the scribe whom
Herodotos met was acquainted with the Greek
language, and that no dragoman was required to
interpret his words.
</p>

<p>
There is a reason for thinking that such was the
case. The story of Krôphi and Môphi, in spite of
the suspicions of Herodotos, is remarkably correct;
even the name of Krôphi has not undergone a greater
amount of transformation than it might have done if
Herodotos had written it down himself from the
scribe's mouth. It is the Egyptian Qerti or Qoriti,
<q>the two holes</q> out of which Egyptian mythology
supposed Hâpi, the Nile-god, to emerge at the period
of the inundation. The Qerti were at the foot of the
granite peaks of Senem, the island of Bigeh, and of
the opposite cliff on the southern side of the First
Cataract. We can almost fix the exact spot where
one of these Qerti was believed to have been. On
the western bank of Philæ, immediately facing Bigeh,
is a portal built in the reign of Hadrian, on the inner
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
north wall of which is a picture of it. We see the
granite blocks of Bigeh piled one upon the other up
to the summit of the island where Mut the divine
mother, and Horus the saviour, sit and keep watch
over the waters of the southern Nile. Below is the
cavern, encircled by a guardian serpent, within which
the Nile-god is crouched, pouring from a vase in
either hand the waters of the river. Though in
certain points Herodotos has misunderstood his informant,
on the whole the story of Krôphi and Môphi
is a fairly accurate page from the volume of Egyptian
mythology. Even the jingling Môphi may be derived
from the Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>moniti</foreign> or <q>mountains</q>
between which the river ran, though Lauth may
be right in holding that Krôphi is Qer-Hâpi, <q>the
hollow of the Nile,</q> and Môphi Mu-Hâpi, <q>the waters
of the Nile.</q>
</p>

<p>
But in one point the Greek historian has made a
serious mistake. It was not between Assuan and
Elephantinê that the sources of the Nile were placed,
but between Bigeh and the mainland, on the other side
of the Cataract. Between Assuan and Elephantinê
there are no <q>mountains,</q> only the channel of the river.
In saying therefore that Krôphi and Môphi were
mountains and that they rose between Syênê and
Elephantinê, Herodotos proves beyond all possibility
of doubt that he had never been at the spot. Had
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
he actually visited Assuan the words of the sacred
scribe would have been reported more correctly.
</p>

<p>
At Elephantinê honours were paid to <q>the great</q>
god of the Nile, who rose from his caverns in the
neighbourhood. Of this we have been assured by a
mutilated Greek inscription on a large slab of granite
which was discovered by English sappers at Assuan
in 1885. It records the endowments and privileges
which were granted to the priests of Elephantinê by
the earlier Ptolemies, and one line of it refers to the
places <q>wherein is the fountain of the Nile.</q> But long
before the days of the Ptolemies and of Greek visitors
to Egypt, when the First Cataract was the boundary
of Egyptian rule and knowledge, the fountain of
the Nile was already placed immediately beyond
it. This infantile belief of Egyptian mythology was
preserved, like so much else of prehistoric antiquity,
in the mythology of later days. In the temple of
Redesîyeh, on the road from Edfu to Berenikê, an
inscription relates how Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> dug a well in the
desert and how the water gushed up, <q>as from the
depth of the two Qerti of Elephantinê.</q> Here the
bottomless springs are transferred from Bigeh to
Elephantinê, thus explaining how Herodotos could
have been led into his error of supposing them to
be two mountains between Elephantinê and Assuan.
Doubtless the sacred scribe had marked the position
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
of the island of Bigeh by its relation to the better
known island of Elephantinê.
</p>

<p>
The very name of the city which stood on the
southern extremity of Elephantinê implied that here,
in the days of its foundation, was placed the source
of the Egyptian Nile. It was called Qebhu, the city
of <q>fresh water,</q> a word represented by the picture
of a vase from which water is flowing. At times the
city was also called Abu, but Abu was more
correctly the name of the island on which it stood.
Abu, in fact, signified the island <q>of elephants,</q> of
which the Greek Elephantinê was but a translation.
In that early age, when it first became known to the
Egyptians, the African elephant must still have
existed there.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos does not seem to have been aware
that Elephantinê was an island as well as a city.
Except where he is reporting the words of the sacred
scribe, he always speaks of it as <q>a city,</q> sometimes
to the exclusion of the more important Syênê. It is
another sign that his voyage up the Nile did not
extend so far.
</p>

<p>
We need not point out other instances of his
ignorance of the country above the Fayyûm. Those
which have been already quoted are enough. The
summer months which he spent in Egypt were more
than fully employed in visiting the wonders of
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
Memphis and the chief cities of the Delta, and in
exploring the Fayyûm. Upper Egypt was closed to
him, as it was to the rest of his countrymen for
many a long day.
</p>

<p>
But we are now able to trace his journey with
some degree of exactness. He must have arrived
about the beginning of July at the mouth of the
Kanôpic arm of the Nile&mdash;the usual destination of
Greek ships&mdash;and thus have made his way by
Hermopolis or Damanhur to the Greek capital
Naukratis. There he doubtless hired his Karian
dragoman, with whom he sailed away over the inundated
land to Sais. But his expedition to Sais was
only an excursion, from which he returned to continue
his voyage in a direct line past Prosôpitis and the
pyramids of Gizeh to Memphis. There he inspected
the great temple of Ptah, whom his countrymen
identified with their Hephæstos, and from thence he
went by water to see the pyramids. It was while he
was at Memphis, moreover, that he paid a visit to
Heliopolis, with its university and its temple, of which
all that is left to-day is the obelisk of Usertesen.
Next he made his voyage up the Nile, past the brick
pyramids of Dahshûr, to Anysis or Herakleopolis,
and from thence to the Fayyûm. Then he returned
to Memphis, and then again passing Heliopolis sailed
northward to Bubastis and Buto. It was now
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
probably that he made excursions to Paprêmis
and Busiris, though our ignorance of the precise
situation of these places unfortunately prevents us
from being certain of the fact. Eventually he found
himself at Daphnæ, on the Pelusiac branch of the
Nile. This brought him to Pelusium, where he took
ship for Tyre.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. In The Steps Of Herodotos.</head>

<p>
Let us follow Herodotos in his Egyptian journey
and meet him where he landed at the Kanôpic
mouth of the Nile. The place had been known to
Greek sailors in days of which tradition alone had
preserved a memory. It was here that pirates and
traders had raided the fields of the <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> or
exchanged slaves and Ægean vases for the precious
wares of Egypt in the age when Achæan princes
ruled at Mykenæ and Tiryns. Guided by the island
of Pharos, they had made their way a few miles eastward
to the mouth of the great river which is called
Aigyptos in the <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>.
</p>

<p>
When Egypt was at last opened to Greek trade
and enterprise in the time of the twenty-sixth
dynasty it was still the Kanôpic arm of the Nile
towards which their vessels had to steer. Nowhere
else were they allowed to land their goods or sail up
the sacred stream of the Nile. If stress of weather
drove them to some other part of the coast, they
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
were forced to remain there till the wind permitted
them to sail to Kanôpos or to send their goods in
native boats by the same route. From time immemorial
the coast of the Delta had been carefully
guarded against the piratical attacks of the barbarians
of the north. Watch-towers and garrisons were
established at fitting intervals along it, which were
under the charge of a special officer. The mouth of
the Kanôpic branch of the river was guarded with
more than usual care, and here was the custom-house
through which all foreign goods had to pass.
</p>

<p>
Kanôpos, from which the arm of the river took its
name, was a small but wealthy city. It was called in
Egyptian Peguath, sometimes also Kah-n-Nub, <q>the
soil of gold</q> from the yellow sand on which it was
built, though Greek vanity believed that this name
had been given to it from Kanôbos, the pilot of
Menelaos, whose tomb was of course discovered
there. In later days, when Alexandria had absorbed
its commerce and industry, it became, along with the
outlying Zephyrion, a fashionable Alexandrine
suburb. It was filled with drinking-shops and
chapels, to which the pleasure-loving crowds of
Alexandria used to make their way by the canal that
united the two cities. The sick came also to seek
healing in the temple of Serapis, or to ask the god to
tell them the means of cure. The rich, too, had their
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
villas close to the shrine of Aphroditê Arsinoê, on the
breezy promontory of Zephyrion, while the rocks on
the shore were cut into luxuriously-fitted baths for
those who wished to bathe in the sea.
</p>

<p>
The site of Zephyrion is now occupied by the
little village of Abukîr, memorable in the annals of
England and France. In 1891 Daninos Pasha made
some excavations there which brought to light a few
scanty remains of the temple of Aphroditê. The
foundations of its walls were found, as well as two
limestone sphinxes inscribed with the name of Amon-em-hat
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, and three great statues of red granite, one
of them upright, the others seated. The upright
figure was that of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> with a roll of papyrus
in his hand; while the other two were female, one of
them being a representation of Hont-mâ-Ra, the
Pharaoh's wife. The sphinxes and statues must
have been brought from some older building to
decorate the shrine of the Alexandrine goddess, and
their discoverer believes that the figure of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>
is older even than the age of that monarch, who has
usurped it, and that it goes back to the epoch of the
twelfth dynasty. Other relics of the temple&mdash;fragments
of red granite from some gigantic naos,
portions of statues, broken sphinxes, and a colossal
human foot&mdash;strew the rocks at the foot of the
promontory whereon Zephyrion stood and bear
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
witness to the intensity of Christian zeal when
paganism was abolished in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The Kanôpic arm of the Nile has long since
been filled up, and the <foreign rend='italic'>fellah</foreign> ploughs his field or the
water-fowl congregate in the stagnant marsh where
Greek trading ships once sailed. But a large part of
the marsh is now in process of being reclaimed, and
the engineers who have been draining and washing it
have come across many traces of the ancient Kanôpos.
It lay to the east of Zephyrion, between the shore
and the marshy lake.
</p>

<p>
Though the journey from Alexandria to Abukîr
must now be undertaken in a railway carriage and not
in a barge, it is still pleasant in the early autumn. We
pass through fertile gardens and forests of fig-trees,
past groves of palm with rich clusters of red dates
hanging from them, while the cool sea-breeze blows
in at the window, and the clear blue sky shines overhead.
But instead of temples and taverns we find
at the end of our journey nothing but sand and sea-shells,
broken monuments, and a deserted shore.
</p>

<p>
The vessel in which Herodotos must have gone
from Kanôpos to Naukratis was probably native
rather than Greek. It would have differed in one
important respect from the Nile-boats of to-day. Its
sail was square, not triangular like the modern lateen
sails which have been introduced from the Levant.
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
But in other respects it resembled the vessels which
are still used on the Nile. Part of the deck was
covered with the house in which the traveller lived,
and which was divided into rooms, and fitted up in
accordance with the ideas of the day. Awnings protected
it from the sun, and the sides of the boat as
well as the rudder were brilliantly painted.
</p>

<p>
On the way to Naukratis the voyager passed
Hermopolis, the modern Damanhur, a name which
is merely the old Egyptian <hi rend='italic'>Dema n Hor</hi>, or <q>City of
Horus.</q> It is not surprising, therefore, that Herodotos
refers to the city, though the statement he
makes in regard to it is not altogether correct. All
the dead ibises of Egypt, he says, were carried to
Hermopolis to be embalmed and buried. Such might
have been the case on the western side of the Delta,
but it was true only of that limited district. There
was another Hermopolis in the east of the Delta,
called Bah in ancient Egyptian, Tel el-Baqlîyeh
in modern times, where a large burial-place of the
sacred ibises was discovered by the <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> six or
seven years ago. Tel el-Baqlîyeh is the second
station on the line of railway from Mansurah to Abu
Kebîr, and from it have come the bronze ibises and
ibis-heads which have filled the shops of the Cairene
dealers in antiquities. The bronzes were found
among the multitudinous mummies of the sacred
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
bird, like the bronze cats in the cemetery of the
sacred cat at Bubastis. Bah was, in fact, the holy
city of the <q>nome of the Ibis.</q> The mound of the
old city has now been almost demolished by the
hunter for <foreign rend='italic'>antikas</foreign>, but Dr. Naville noticed some
fragments of inscribed stone in the neighbouring
village which led him to believe that Nektanebo <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>
once intended to erect a temple here to Thoth.
</p>

<p>
From Hermopolis to Naukratis was a short
distance. Naukratis was the capital of the Egyptian
Greeks, and its site, which had been lost for centuries,
was discovered by Professor Flinders Petrie in 1884,
when he was working for the Egypt Exploration
Fund. The Fund had been formed with the primary
intention of finding the sites of Pithom and Naukratis,
and it had been hardly two years in existence
before that intention was fulfilled.
</p>

<p>
If we leave the train at Teh el-Barûd, the junction
of the Upper Egyptian line of railway with that
from Alexandria to Cairo, and turn our faces westward,
we shall have a pleasant walk of about five
miles, part of it under an avenue of trees, to a mound
of potsherds which covers several acres in extent and
is known to the natives as Kôm Qa'if. This mound
represents all that is left of Naukratis. To the west
of it runs a canal, the modern successor of the ancient
Kanôpic branch of the Nile.
</p>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<p>
When Professor Petrie first visited the spot, the
diggers for <foreign rend='italic'>sebah</foreign> had already been busily at work.
<foreign rend='italic'>Sebah</foreign> is the nitrous earth from the sites of old cities,
which is used as manure, and to the search for it we
owe the discovery of many memorials of the past.
At Kôm Qa'if the larger part of the earth had been
removed, and all that remained were the fragments
of pottery which had been sifted from it. But the
fragments were sufficient to reveal the history of the
place. Most of them belonged to the archaic period
of the Greek vase-maker's art, and were such as
had never before been found in the land of Egypt.
It was evident that the great city whose site they
covered must have been the Naukratis of the Greeks.
</p>

<p>
As soon as Professor Petrie had settled down to
the excavation of the mound, a few months after his
discovery, the evidence of inscriptions was added to
the evidence of potsherds. An inscribed stone from
the mound was standing at the entrance of the
country-house in which he lived, and on turning it
over he found it was engraved with Greek letters
which recorded the honours paid by <q>the city of the
Naukratians</q> to Heliodôros the priest of Athêna
and the keeper of its archives. For two winters
first Mr. Petrie and then Mr. Ernest Gardner worked
at the ruins, and though more excavations are
needed before they can be exhaustively explored,
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
the plan of the old city has been mapped out, the
history of its growth and decline has been traced,
and a vast number of archaic Greek inscriptions
from the dedicated vases of its temples have been
secured.
</p>

<p>
To the south of the town were the fortress and
camp of the Greek mercenaries, who were probably
settled there by Psammetikhos. The camp was
surrounded by a wall, and within it stood the
Hellênion, the common altar of the Ionians from
Khios, Teos, Phokæa and Klazomenæ, of the
Dorians from Rhodes, Knidos, Halikarnassos and
Phasêlis, and of the Æolians of Mytilênê. The
great enclosure still remains, as well as the lower
chambers of the fort, and Mr. Petrie found that in
the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, when it was no
longer needed for purposes of defence, it was provided
with a stately entrance, to which an avenue of
ruins led from the west.
</p>

<p>
The traders and settlers built their houses north
of the camp. Here too the Greek sailors and
merchants, who had taken no part in the erection of
the great altar, and who perhaps had no relations
among the soldiers of the fort, built special temples
for themselves. If we walk across the level ground
which separates the fort from the old city, the first
heap of rubbish we come to marks the site of the
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
temple and sacred enclosure of Castor and Pollux.
A little to the north was the still larger temple and
<foreign rend='italic'>temenos</foreign> or sacred enclosure of Apollo, and adjoining
it, still on the north side, was the temple of Hêrê,
whose <foreign rend='italic'>temenos</foreign> was the largest of all. The temple of
Apollo had been erected by the Milesians, and that
it was the oldest in the city may be gathered from
the archaic character of the inscriptions on the potsherds
discovered in the trench into which the broken
vases of the temple were thrown. The Samians were
the builders of the temple of Hêrê, and Herodotos
tells us that there was another dedicated to Zeus by
the Æginetans. The ruins of this, however, have not
yet been found, but far away towards the northern
end of the ruin a small temple and <foreign rend='italic'>temenos</foreign> of
Aphroditê have been brought to light. Here
Rhodôpis worshipped, who had been freed from
slavery by the brother of Sappho, and whose charms
were still celebrated at Naukratis in the days of
Herodotos.
</p>

<p>
Among the potsherds disinterred from the
rubbish-trench of the temple of Apollo were
portions of a large and beautiful bowl dedicated to
<q>Phanês, the son of Glaukos.</q> Mr. Gardner is
probably right in believing that this is the very
Phanês who deserted to Kambyses, and, according
to the Greek story, instructed him how to march
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
across the desert into Egypt. It may be that Herodotos
saw the bowl when it was still intact, and that
the story of the deserter was told him over it; in
any case, it was doubtless at Naukratis, and possibly
from the priests of Apollo, that he heard it.
</p>

<p>
To the west of the temple of Apollo and divided
from it only by a street, Mr. Petrie found what had
been a manufactory of scarabs. They were of the
blue and white kind that was fashionable in the Greek
world in the sixth century before our era, and the
earliest of them bear the name of Amasis. From
Naukratis they were exported to the shores of Europe
and Asia along with the pottery for which the Greek
city was famous.
</p>

<p>
On his way to Naukratis Herodotos had passed
two other Greek settlements, Anthylla and Arkhandropolis.
But we do not yet know where they
stood. Nor do we know the position of that <q>Fort
of the Milesians</q> which, according to Strabo, was
occupied by Milesian soldiers near Rosetta in the
time of Psammetikhos, before they sailed upon the
river into <q>the nome of Sais</q> and there founded
Naukratis.
</p>

<p>
The city of Sais was one of the objects of Herodotos's
journey. In the period of the inundation it
was within an easy distance of Naukratis, so that an
excursion to it did not require much time. Sais was
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
the birthplace and capital of the Pharaohs of the
twenty-sixth dynasty; it was here that Psammetikhos
raised the standard of rebellion against his
Assyrian suzerain with the help of the Greek mercenaries,
and his successors adorned it with splendid
and costly buildings. When Herodotos visited it, it
had lost none of its architectural magnificence. He
saw there the palace from which Apries had gone forth
to attack Amasis, and to which he returned a prisoner;
the great temple of Neit, with its rows of sphinxes and
its sacred lake; and the huge naos of granite which
two thousand men spent three whole years in bringing
from Assuan. It had been left just outside the enclosure
within which the temple stood, as well as the
tombs of Apries and Amasis, and even of the god
Osiris himself. True, there was a rival sepulchre of
Osiris at Abydos, venerated by the inhabitants of
Upper Egypt since the days of the Old Empire, but
Abydos was far distant from Sais, and when the latter
city became the capital of the kingdom there was
none bold enough to deny its claim. Herodotos, at
all events, who never reached Abydos, was naturally
never informed of the rival tomb.
</p>

<p>
He was told, however, of the mystery-play acted
at night on the sacred lake of Sais in memory of the
death and resurrection of Osiris, and he was told
also of the shameful insult inflicted by Kambyses on
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
the dead Amasis. It was said that the Pharaoh's
mummy had been dragged from its resting-place,
and after being scourged was burnt to ashes. The
Egyptian priests bore no good-will to Kambyses,
and it may be, therefore, that the story is not true.
</p>

<p>
Sais was under the protection of the goddess
Neit, the unbegotten mother of the sun. When the
Greeks first came there, they identified the goddess
with their own Athêna, led thereto by the similarity
of the names. But this identification led to further
results. As Athêna was the patron goddess of
Athens, so it was supposed that there was a special
connection between Sais and Athens. While Athêna
was fabled to have come from Libya, Kekrops, the
mythic founder of Athens, was transformed into an
Egyptian of Sais. It was from a priest of Sais,
moreover, that Solon, the Athenian legislator, learned
the wisdom of the Egyptians.
</p>

<p>
The squalid village of Sa el-Hagar, <q>Sais of the
stone,</q> is the modern representative of the capital of
Psammetikhos. In these days of railways it is
difficult of access, as there is no station in its neighbourhood.
In the earlier part of the century, however,
when the traveller had to go from Alexandria
to Cairo in a dahabîyeh, he was compelled to pass
it, and it was consequently well-known to the tourist.
But little is left of the populous city and its stately
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
monuments except mounds of disintegrated brick,
a large enclosure surrounded by a crude brick wall
seventy feet thick, and the sacred lake. The lake,
however, is sacred no longer; shrunken in size and
choked with rubbish, it is a stagnant pool in the
winter, and an expanse of half-dried mud in the late
spring. It is situated within the great wall, which is
that of the <foreign rend='italic'>temenos</foreign> of Neit. Stone is valuable in
the Delta, and hardly a fragment of granite or limestone
survives from all the buildings and colossal
monuments that Herodotos saw. But in 1891 a
great number of bronze figures of Neit, some of them
inlaid with silver, were found there by the <foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign>.
They are of the careful and finished workmanship
that marks the age of the twenty-sixth dynasty, and
on one of the largest of them is a two-fold inscription
in Egyptian hieroglyphs and the letters and language
of the Karians. It was dedicated to the goddess of
Sais in the reign of Psammetikhos by a son of a
Karian mother and an Egyptian father who bore
both an Egyptian and a Karian name. It is an interesting
proof of the readiness of some at least
among the natives of Sais to mingle with the foreigner,
and it shows further that the Karian mercenaries,
like the Greeks, brought their wives and daughters
along with them.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos seems to have been at Sais when the
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
festival of <q>burning lamps</q> was celebrated there.
On the night of the festival lamps were lighted round
about the houses in the open air, the lamps being
cups filled with salt and oil, on the surface of which
a wick floated. All who could thronged to Sais to
take part in the ceremonies; those who could not be
there lighted their lamps at home and so observed
the rites due to Neit. The festival took place in the
summer, probably at the time of the summer solstice,
and the illuminations characteristic of it are still perpetuated
in some of the numerous festivals of modern
Egypt. The annual festival in honour of Isis was
observed all over Egypt in the same way.
</p>

<p>
As the Greek traveller approached Memphis the
pyramids of Gizeh were shown to him towering over
the water on his right. His visit to them was reserved
to another day, and he continued to sail on to
the ancient capital of the country. Memphis was
still in all its glory. Its lofty walls of crude brick,
painted white, shone in the sun, and its great temple
of Ptah still preserved the monuments and records
of the early dynasties of Egypt. Built on an embankment
rescued from the Nile, it was said, by Menes,
the first monarch of the united kingdom, Memphis,
though of no great width, extended along the banks
of the river for a distance of half-a-day's journey.
To the west, in the desert, lay its necropolis,
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
the city of the dead, reaching from Abu Roâsh
on the north to Dahshûr on the south. On the
opposite side of the Nile, a little to the north, was
the fortress of Khri-Ahu, which guarded the approach
to the river. Where Cairo now stands Herodotos
saw only sand and water. Even Khri-Ahu was
merely an insignificant village at the foot of a fortress
of mud brick; the strong walls and towers of hewn
stone in which the Roman legion afterwards kept
ward over Egypt were as yet unbuilt. All who
could afford it lived in Memphis and its suburbs, and
the rock-hewn tombs at the foot of the citadel of
modern Cairo are of the Roman age.
</p>

<p>
From Memphis to Heliopolis was rather more
than twenty miles, or a morning's row on the river.
Herodotos, therefore, after having been told at
Memphis of the experiment made by Psammetikhos
to discover the origin of language, speaks of having
<q>turned into</q> Heliopolis in order to make further
inquiries about the matter, <q>for the Heliopolitans are
said to be the best informed of the Egyptians.</q> We
may gather from his words that he made an excursion
to Heliopolis while he was staying in Memphis.
But he would have passed it again on his homeward
voyage.
</p>

<p>
The site of Heliopolis is well-known to every
tourist who has been to Cairo. The drive to the
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
garden and ostrich-farm of Matarîyeh and the obelisk
of Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> is a pleasant way of filling up an afternoon.
But of the ancient city of Heliopolis or On,
with its famous temple of Ra, the Sun-god, its
university of learned priests, and its innumerable
monuments of the past, there is little now to be seen.
The obelisk reared in front of its temple a thousand
years before Joseph married the daughter of its high-priest
still stands where it stood in his day; but the
temple has vanished utterly. So, too, has the sister
obelisk which was erected by its side, and of which
Arabic historians still have something to say.
Nothing is left but the mud-brick wall of the sacred
enclosure, and a thick layer of lime-stone chippings
which tell how the last relics of the temple of the
Sun-god were burnt into lime for the Cairo of Ismail
Pasha. One or two fragments were rescued from
destruction by Dr. Grant Bey, the most noticeable of
which is a portion of a cornice, originally 30 feet
4 inches in length, which had been erected by
Nektanebo <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, the last of the native Pharaohs.
Blocks with the names of the second and third
Ramses are also lying near the western gate of the
enclosure, and in the eastern desert are the tombs of
the dead. Nothing more remains of the old capital
of Egyptian religion and learning. The destruction
is indeed complete; the spoiler whom Jeremiah saw
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
in prophetic vision has broken <q>the images of Beth-Shemesh,</q>
and burnt with fire <q>the houses of the gods
of the Egyptians.</q> If we would see the obelisks and
images of On we must now go to the cities and
museums of Europe or America. It was from
Heliopolis that the huge scarab of stone now in the
British Museum was originally brought to Alexandria,
and at Heliopolis Cleopatra's Needle was first set up
by Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> in front of the temple of Amon.
</p>

<p>
Heliopolis was the centre and source of the
worship of the Sun-god in ancient Egypt, in so far,
at all events, as he was adored under the name of
Ra. The worship goes back to prehistoric days.
Menes was already a <q>son of Ra,</q> inheriting his right
to rule from the Sun-god of On. The theology of
Heliopolis is incorporated in the earliest chapters of
the Book of the Dead, that Ritual of the Departed, a
knowledge of which ensured the safe passage of the
dead man into the world to come. It was in the
great hall of its first temple that Egyptian mythology
believed Horus to have been cured of his wounds
after the battle with Set. The origin of the temple,
in fact, like the origin of the school of priests which
gathered round it, was too far lost in the mists of
antiquity for authentic history to remember.
</p>

<p>
As befitted its theological character, Heliopolis was
rich in sacred animals. The bull Mnêvis, in which
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
the Sun-god was incarnated, was a rival of the bull
Apis of Memphis, the incarnation of Ptah. The two
bulls point to a community of worship between the
two localities in that primeval age when neither Ra
of Heliopolis nor Ptah of Memphis was known, and
when the primitive Egyptian population&mdash;whoever
they may have been&mdash;were plunged in the grossest
superstitions of African fetichism. Herodotos did not
hear of the bull Mnêvis. But he was acquainted with
the story of another sacred animal of Heliopolis, the
<foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign> or Phœnix, the sacred bird of Ra. Indeed, the
fame of the phœnix had long before penetrated to
Greece. Hesiod alludes to it, and the account of the
marvellous bird given by Herodotos was <q>stolen,</q>
we are told by Porphyry, from his predecessor
Hekatæos. Hekatæos says that it was like an eagle,
whereas the monuments show that it was a heron,
and Herodotos follows him in the blunder. We
may argue from this, as Professor Wiedemann does,
that Herodotos himself never saw its picture. But
otherwise his account is correct. Its wings were red
and gold, and it represented the solar cycle of five
hundred years.
</p>

<p>
When Strabo visited Heliopolis in the age of
Augustus he found it already half deserted. Its
schools and library had been superseded by those of
Alexandria, and although the houses in which the
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
priestly philosophers had once lived were still standing,
they were now empty. Among them was the
house in which Plato and Eudoxos had studied not
long after the time when Herodotos was there. In
spite, therefore, of the Persian wars Herodotos must
have found the ancient university still famous and
flourishing. Just as in the Cairo of to-day the whole
circle of Mohammedan science is taught in the
University of El-Azhar on the basis of the Qorân,
so in the Heliopolis which Herodotos visited all
the circle of Egyptian knowledge was still taught
and learned on the basis of the doctrines of the
Heliopolitan school. The feelings with which the
Greek traveller viewed the professors and their pupils&mdash;if,
indeed, he was allowed to do so&mdash;must have been
similar to those with which an English tourist now
passes through the Azhar mosque.
</p>

<p>
From Heliopolis Herodotos continued his voyage
down the Pelusiac arm of the Nile to Bubastis, thus
following nearly the same line of travel as the
modern tourist who goes by train from Cairo to
Zagazig. The rubbish heaps of Tel Basta, just beyond
the station of Zagazig, mark the site of Bubastis,
called Pi-beseth in the Old Testament (Ezek. xxx. 17),
Pi-Bast, <q>the Temple of Bast,</q> by the Egyptians.
The cat-headed goddess Bast presided over the fortunes
of the nome and city, where she was identified
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
with Sekhet, the lion-headed goddess of Memphis.
But the cat and the lion never lay down in peace
together. As a hieroglyphic text at Philæ puts it,
Sekhet was cruel and Bast was kindly.
</p>

<p>
The exclusive worship of Bast at Bubastis, however,
dated from the time of Osorkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> of the twenty-second
dynasty, as Dr. Naville's excavations have
made plain. Before that period other deities, more
especially Butô and Amon-Ra, reigned there. Bast,
in fact, was of foreign origin. She was the feminine
form of Bes, the warrior god who came from the
coasts of Arabia, and her association with the cat
perhaps originated far away in the south.
</p>

<p>
The description given by Herodotos of Bubastis
and its festival is clearly that of an eye-witness. He
tells us how the temple stands in the middle of the
town surrounded by a canal which is shaded with
trees, and how the visitor looks down upon it from
the streets of the city, which had grown in height
while the level of the temple had remained unaltered.
He tells us further how a broad street runs from it
to the market-place, and thence to a chapel dedicated
to Hermês, and how at the great annual festival
crowds of men and women flocked to it in boats,
piping and singing, clapping the hands and dancing,
offering sacrifices when they arrived at the shrine,
and drinking wine to excess. A similar sight can be
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
seen even now in the month of August at Tantah,
where the religious fair is thronged by men and
women indulging in all the amusements recounted
by the old Greek traveller, sometimes beyond the
verge of decency. Wine alone is absent from the
modern feast, its place being taken by <foreign rend='italic'>hashish</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>raki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
As the festival was held in honour of Bast, it was
probably an annual commemoration of the great
<q>Shed-festival</q> of thirty years celebrated by Osorkon
II. in his twenty-second year, and depicted on the
walls of the hall which Dr. Naville has discovered.
The <q>Shed-festival</q> took place during the month of
August&mdash;in the time of the sixth dynasty on the
27th of Epiphi. It was probably, therefore, at the
end of August or the beginning of September that
Herodotos found himself in the city of Bast.
</p>

<p>
The description Herodotos gives of the position
of the temple is still true to-day. The temple, which
he pronounced to be the prettiest in Egypt, is now in
ruins, like the houses and streets that encircled it.
But the visitor to Tel-Bast still looks down upon its
site from the rubbish-mounds of the ruined habitations,
and can still trace the beds of the canals which
were carried round it. Even the street which led
to the market-place is still visible, and Dr. Naville
has found the remains of the little temple which
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
Herodotos supposed to be that of Hermês, the
Egyptian Thoth. In this, however, he was wrong.
Like the larger edifice, it was dedicated to Bast, and
seems to have been used as a treasury. It was,
therefore, under the protection of Thoth, whose
figure decorated its walls, and Dr. Naville is doubtless
right in believing that this has led to the mistake
of Herodotos or his guides. Osorkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> consecrated
in it large quantities of precious things, including
about £130,300 in gold and £13,000 in silver&mdash;an
evident proof that the internal condition of his kingdom
was flourishing.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Naville's excavations were undertaken for the
Egypt Exploration Fund in 1887-89, and were chiefly
made among the broken columns and dislocated
stones of the larger temple. They have given us the
outlines of its history. Like most of the great
temples of Egypt, its foundation went back to the very
beginning of Egyptian civilisation. The Pharaohs of
the Old Empire repaired or enlarged it, and the
names of Kheops and Khephren, as well as of Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>,
have been found upon its blocks. The kings of the
twelfth and thirteenth dynasties embellished it, and
even the Hyksos princes did the same. In the days
when they had adopted the culture and customs of
Egypt and were holding royal state at Zoan, two of
them at least restored and beautified the temple of
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
Bubastis and called themselves the sons of Ra. One
of them, Apophis, may have been the Apophis
whose demand that the vassal-king of Thebes should
worship Sutekh instead of Amon brought about the
war of independence; the other, Khian User-n-Set-Ra,
the Iannas of Manetho, has engraved his name on
a colossal lion which was carried to Babylon by some
Chaldæan conqueror.
</p>

<p>
The monarchs of the eighteenth dynasty continued
the pious work of the Hyksos whom they had
expelled. But the civil disturbances which attended
the fall of the dynasty caused injury to the temple,
and we find Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> and Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> once more restoring
it. The kings of the twentieth dynasty have
also left memorials in it, but it was under the
twenty-second dynasty&mdash;the successors of Shishak&mdash;that
Bubastis reached the highest point of its
prosperity. The princes who followed Shishak made
the city their capital and its temple their royal
chapel. The great festival hall was built by Osorkon
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> between the entrance hall and the main court,
and the worship of Bast was exclusively installed in
it. Temple and city alike underwent but little
change down to the days of Herodotos. It was after
his visit that the last addition was made to the
sacred buildings. With the recovery of Egyptian
independence after the successful revolt from Persia
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
came a new era of architectural activity, and Nektanebo
<hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, the first king of the thirtieth dynasty,
erected a great hall in the rear of the shrine. After
this the history of the temple fades out of view.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos was told that the height of the
mound on which the city of Bubastis stood was an
indication of the evil deeds of its inhabitants.
Sabako, the Ethiopian conqueror, it was said, had
caused the sites of the Egyptian cities to be raised
by convict labour, just as they had been previously
raised by those who cut the canals under Sesostris.
But the whole story was an invention of the dragomen.
The disintegration of the crude brick of which
the houses of Egypt are built makes them quickly
decay and give place to other buildings, which are
erected on the mound they have formed. As the
city grows in age, so does the <foreign rend='italic'>tel</foreign> or mound whereon
it stands grow in height, and had Herodotos travelled
in Upper Egypt he would have seen the process
going on under his eyes. In the Delta, moreover,
there was a special cause for the great height of the
city-mounds. The water of the inundation percolated
through the ground, and in order that the lower
floor of a house should be dry, it was necessary to
build it on a series of vaults or cellars. A few years
ago these vaults were very visible in some of the old
houses of Tel-Bast. They had no outlet, either
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
by door or window, and were consequently never
employed as store-rooms. Their sole use was to
keep the rest of the house dry.
</p>

<p>
The cemetery of the sacred cats was on the western
side of the town. But the cats do not appear to
have been embalmed, as elsewhere in Egypt; they
were either buried or burned. Among the bones
which have been sent to England naturalists have
found none of our modern domestic cat. Several,
however, of the bronze cats of the Ptolemaic age
which have been discovered with the bones unmistakably
represent the domestic animal. Generally
they have the small head of the modern Egyptian
puss.
</p>

<p>
<q>A little below Bubastis</q> Herodotos passed the
deserted <q>camp</q> and fortress of the Ionian and
Karian mercenaries of Psammetikhos, and saw the
slips for their vessels and the ruins of their houses
still standing on the shore. Amasis had transferred
them to Memphis, in the belief that it was rather
from his Egyptian subjects that he needed protection
than from his neighbours in Asia. The site of the
camp was discovered and partially excavated by
Professor Petrie for the Egypt Exploration Fund
in 1886, and one of the results of his discoveries was
to show that it was also the site of the frontier
fortress called by the Greeks Daphnæ. What its
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
Egyptian name was we do not know with certainty,
though it is probable that Professor Petrie is right
in holding it to be the Tahpanhes of the prophet
Jeremiah. It is now known as Tel ed-Deffeneh.
</p>

<p>
The drying up of the Pelusiac arm of the Nile
has brought the desolation of the desert to Tel
ed-Deffeneh. The canal which has replaced it is
brackish; Lake Menzaleh, which bounds the Tel to
the east, is more brackish still. The land is impregnated
with salt, and covered in places with drifts
of sand. There is no cultivated soil nearer than
Salahîyeh, twelve miles away; no water-way less
distant than Kantara on the Suez Canal.
</p>

<p>
The greater part of the ancient site lies between
Lake Menzaleh on the east and a swamp out of
which the canal flows on the west, and it covers a
large acreage of ground. Northward are the canal, a
marsh, and mounds of sand, and beyond the canal
lies the cemetery of the ancient fortress, as well as a
suburb which was probably the Karian quarter. In
the centre of the site rises the Tel proper, a great
mound of disintegrated brickwork called <q>the palace
of the Jew's daughter.</q> Excavation soon made it
clear that it represented the fortress of Daphnæ, and
that it was built by Psammetikhos when he settled
his Greek garrison there. For a frontier fortress no
place could have been better chosen. It guarded
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
the eastern branch of the Nile, while from its summit
we look across the desert, on one side along the high-road
which once led to Syria, and on the other as far
as the mounds of Tanis. The fort itself has crumbled
into dust, but the vaulted chambers on which it was
erected still exist, as well as the <q>pavement</q> at its
entrance.
</p>

<p>
The pottery found at Tel ed-Deffeneh is early
Greek, but of a different type from that of Naukratis.
Like the latter, it would seem to have been manufactured
on the spot and exported from thence to all
parts of the Greek world. Jewellery, too, appears to
have been made there by the Greek or Karian
artisans who lived under the protection of their
military kinsmen. But the manufacture of both
pottery and jewellery came to a sudden end. When
Amasis removed the mercenaries to Memphis in the
middle of the sixth century before Christ the civilian
population departed with them. Between that date
and a new and unimportant settlement in the Ptolemaic
period the site seems to have been deserted.
When Herodotos passed it by, it had no inhabitants.
</p>

<p>
From Daphnæ to Pelusium the voyage was short.
Pelusium, once the key of Egypt, has shared the fate
of Daphnæ. The channel of the river that flowed by
it has become a dreary reach of black salt mud, and
the fields which once supplied the city with food are
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
wastes of sterile soil or mountains of yellow sand.
Not even a solitary Bedouin disturbs the solitude of
the spot at most seasons of the year. All that
reminds the traveller of human life as he encamps on
the edge of the sand-dunes is the electric light which
flashes through the night from Port Said far away on
the horizon.
</p>

<p>
In the midst of the desolate waste of poisonous
mud rise the two large mounds which alone are left
of Pelusium. On the larger of these, to the westward,
lie the granite columns and other relics of the Roman
temple, beneath which, and below the present level
of the water, are the ruins of the temple of the
Pharaonic age. The ground is strewn with broken
glass and pottery, some Roman, some Saracenic.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptian name of Pelusium is still unknown,
and before we can discover it excavations upon its
site will be necessary. Ezekiel calls it Sin (xxx. 15,
16)&mdash;at least, if the commentators are to be trusted&mdash;and
when the Greeks sought an etymology for the
name they gave it in their own word for <q>mud.</q> But
it was a famous spot in the records of Egyptian
history. Avaris, the Hyksos stronghold, must have
been in its neighbourhood, and it was outside its
walls that the Persian conquest of Egypt was decided.
The battle-field where the army of Kambyses, led by
the Greek deserter Phanês, overthrew the Greek
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
mercenaries of the Pharaoh, was near enough for
Herodotos to walk over it and compare the skulls of
the Egyptian and Persian combatants, as he had
already done at Paprêmis. Here, too, he was shown
the spot where the Greek and Karian soldiers of
Psammetikhos <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> had slaughtered the sons of Phanês
over a huge bowl in the sight of their father, and
after mixing the blood of the boys with wine and
water, had savagely drunk it and then rushed to the
battle.
</p>

<p>
Not far from Pelusium another tragedy took
place four centuries after Herodotos had been there.
The fugitive Pompey was welcomed to the shore by
Septimius, the general of the Roman forces in Egypt,
and Akhillas, the commander of the Egyptian army,
and murdered by them as he touched the land.
Akhillas then hastened to Alexandria, to besiege
Cæsar in the royal palace, and the burning of the
great library was the atonement for Pompey's death.
</p>

<p>
Down even to the middle ages Pelusium was still
the seaport of the eastern Delta. It held the place
now occupied by Port Said. It was from its quays
that the vessels started for the Syrian coast. In one
that was bound for Tyre, Herodotos took his passage
and ended his Egyptian tour.
</p>

<p>
But he had visited certain cities in the Delta into
which we have been unable to follow him, owing to
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
the uncertainty that still hangs over their exact
position. Besides the places already described, we
know that he saw Butô, which is coupled with
Khemmis, as well as Paprêmis and Prosôpitis, and
probably also Busiris.
</p>

<p>
Khemmis&mdash;which must be carefully distinguished
from the other Khemmis, the modern Ekhmîm&mdash;was,
he tells us, a floating island <q>in a deep broad
lake by the side of the temple at Butô,</q> where Lêtô,
the Egyptian Uaz, was worshipped. Brugsch identifies
this island of Khemmis with the town and marshes
of Kheb, where the young Horus was hidden by his
mother Isis out of the reach of Set. Kheb was in
the nome called that of Menelaos by the Greeks,
the capital of which seems to have been Pa-Uaz, <q>the
temple of Uaz,</q> transformed by Greek tongues into
Butô, and of which another city was Kanôpos. Butô,
or at least the twin-city where the great temple of
the goddess stood, is probably now represented by
Tel Fera'în, not far to the west of Fuah, at the
extremity of the Mahmudîyeh canal. It was thus
within easy distance of Kanôpos on the one side and
of Sais on the other, and Herodotos might have
visited it from either one of them.
</p>

<p>
But after all it is not certain that he did so. Butô
is mentioned again by him in a passage which
shows that it could not have been Pa-Uaz, but must
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
have rather lain on the eastern side of the Delta,
in the land of Goshen, where the desert adjoined
the <q>Arabian nome.</q> It is where he tells us about
<q>the winged serpents</q> which fly in the spring-time
from Arabia to Egypt, on the confines of which they
are met and slain by the sacred ibises. Anxious to
learn something about them, he visited the spot
where the yearly encounter took place, and there
saw the ground strewn with the bones and spines
of the slaughtered snakes. This spot, he further
informs us, is in the Arabian desert, where it borders
on <q>the Egyptian plain,</q> <q>hard by the city of Buto.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thanks to the excavations made by Mr. Griffith
for the Egypt Exploration Fund at Tel en-Nebêsheh,
near Salahîyeh, we now know where this eastern
city of Buto stood. Its Egyptian name was Am,
and it was the capital of the nineteenth nome of
Am-pehu, but it was consecrated to the worship of
the goddess Uaz, who was symbolised by a winged
snake. The great temple of the goddess was built
on the western side of the town, and the Pharaohs
of the twelfth dynasty, as well as Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> and
his successors, and the Saites of the twenty-sixth
dynasty, had all helped to endow and embellish it.
When the Greek garrison was established in the
neighbourhood at Daphnæ, a colony of Cyprian
potters settled at Am. But in the age of the
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
Ptolemies it fell into decay, and by the beginning
of the Roman era its magnificence belonged to the
past.
</p>

<p>
Just beyond the precincts of the town was the
Arabian desert, the realm of Set. The legend of
Isis and Horus was accordingly transferred to it,
and its patron goddess became Uaz of Butô, who,
under the form of Isis, concealed Horus in its
marshes. Was it here, therefore, in the Pa-Uaz of
Am, that the Butô of Herodotos has to be looked
for, rather than in the Menelaite nome?
</p>

<p>
We know that he must have passed the city of
Am on his way from Bubastis to Daphnæ, and his
expedition to the desert in search of the winged
serpents shows that he stopped there. On the
other hand, his account of the floating island of
Khemmis was derived from his predecessor Hekatæos,
and when he states that the Butô with which
it was connected was built on the Sebennytic branch
of the Nile, <q>as one sails up it from the sea,</q> it
would seem certain that his account of this Butô
was also quoted from the older writer. And yet it
is difficult to believe that his description of the
monolithic shrine which stood there is not given
at first-hand. Perhaps the best explanation would
be that Herodotos really made an excursion to the
city, but has so skilfully mingled what he himself
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
saw there with the description of Hekatæos as to
make it impossible to separate the two.
</p>

<p>
The site of Paprêmis is absolutely unknown, and
we have no clue even to its relative position. But
Prosôpitis may be the fourth nome, Sapi-ris or <q>Sapi
of the south.</q> In Byzantine times its capital bore
the name of Nikiu, which Champollion long ago
identified with the Coptic Pshati and the modern
Abshadi, not far from Menûf. Menûf stands in a
straight line due westward of Benha, and would
have lain directly in the path of the traveller on his
way from Naukratis to Memphis.
</p>

<p>
It was in the island of Prosôpitis that the
Athenian fleet was blockaded by the Persians under
Megabazus, and captured only when the river was
turned into another channel, after the blockade had
lasted for a year and a half. Immediately westward
of Menûf, in fact, an island is formed by the
Rosetta and Damietta branches of the Nile which
unite at the southern end of it, and are joined
together towards the north by the Bahr el-Fara'-unîyeh.
But the island is twenty-seven miles long
by fifteen wide, and it is difficult to understand
how this could have been blockaded by the Persian
army, much less defended by the crews of seventy
vessels, for the space of a year and a half. Herodotos
indeed asserts that the island of Prosôpitis
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
was nine skhœnœ, or about sixty miles in circumference,
and that it contained many cities; but this
only makes the difficulty the greater.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, we come to Busiris, which is described
by the Greek traveller as <q>in the centre of the Delta.</q>
This description exactly suits the position of Pa-Usar
or Busiris, <q>the temple of Osiris, the lord of
Mendes,</q> and the capital of the Busirite nome. Its
modern representative is Abusir, a little to the south
of Semennûd or Sebennytos, on the railway line
from Tanta to Mansûrah. If Herodotos really
visited this place, he must have done so from Sais,
to the west of which it lies in a pretty direct line.
But the distance was considerable, and there is
nothing in the language he uses in regard to it which
obliges us to believe that he was really there. His
description of the festival held there in honour of
Isis is not that of an eye-witness; indeed, the
remark he adds to it that <q>all the Karians who live
in Egypt slash themselves on the forehead with
swords</q> in their religious exercises goes to show
that it could not have been so. All he knows about
the festival is that, after sacrificing, men and women
strike themselves in honour of Osiris. The Karians,
however, who cut their heads like the Persian
devotees of Huseyn in modern Cairo, were not
Egyptians, and therefore would not have been
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
allowed to join in the mysteries of the worship of
Osiris; moreover, they did not live in Busiris, but in
the Karian quarter of Memphis. What Herodotos
tells us about them plainly comes from his Karian
dragoman, and refers to some native Karian festival.
</p>

<p>
There was more than one Pa-Usar or Temple
of Osiris in Lower Egypt. Next to that in the
Busirite nome, the most famous was that of the
Ur-Mer or the bull Mnêvis, in the environs of
Heliopolis. This latter Herodotos would have seen
when he paid his visit to the city of the Sun-god,
and this too was near Memphis, where the Karians
lived.
</p>

<p>
There was yet another Busiris a little to the
north of Memphis itself. According to Pliny, its
inhabitants made their living by climbing the pyramids
for the amusement of strangers, like the
Bedouin of Gizeh to-day. Its name has been preserved
in the village and pyramids of Abusir. But
neither the Busiris of Memphis nor the Busiris of
Heliopolis was <q>in the centre of the Delta,</q> and
it would seem that in this instance also Herodotos
is either quoting from other travellers or is mixing
their experiences with his own. With the Busiris of
Memphis and the Busiris of Heliopolis he was
doubtless acquainted: with the Busiris of the middle
Delta we must conclude he was not. Hence his
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
scanty notice of the festival that was celebrated
there; hence also his reference to the Karian settlers
in Memphis and their religious ceremonies. We
must remember that Herodotos was not the first
Greek tourist in Egypt, and that he too had his
<hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi> and his <hi rend='italic'>Baedeker</hi> like the tourist of to-day.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter VIII. Memphis And The Fayyum.'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. Memphis And The Fayyûm.</head>

<p>
We have followed Herodotos in his travels through
the Delta, have seen him make his way from
Kanôpos and Naukratis to Memphis and back again
to Pelusium, and it is now time to accompany him
through Memphis itself and the Fayyûm. There
are no longer any uncertain sites to identify; from
Memphis southward all is clear and determined.
</p>

<p>
To the visitor the interest of Memphis centred
in its temple of Ptah. It was round the temple that
the city had grown up, and as the city had been the
capital of the older dynasties, so the temple had been
their royal chapel. When the supremacy passed
from Memphis to Thebes, it passed also from Ptah
the god of Memphis to Amon the god of Thebes.
</p>

<p>
It is the great temple of Ptah, accordingly, about
which Herodotos has most to tell us. Other localities
in Memphis, such as the citadel and the palace,
the Karian quarter, or <q>the Tyrian Camp</q> with its
shrine of Ashtoreth, are noticed only incidentally.
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
But the great temple and its monuments are described
as fully as was possible for an <q>impure</q> foreigner,
who was not permitted to enter its inner courts and
who was unacquainted with the Egyptian language.
</p>

<p>
The history of Egypt known to Herodotos before
the age when Greek mercenaries and traders were
settled in the country by Psammetikhos is almost
wholly connected with the monuments of the temple
which were shown to him. And a very curious
history it is&mdash;a collection of folk-tales, partly
Egyptian, but mainly Karian or Greek in origin,
and not always of a seemly character, which the
dragomen attached to the various objects the visitor
saw. Even the royal names round which they
revolved were sometimes indiscoverable in the
authentic annals of Egypt. But the stories were all
gravely noted down by the traveller, and though they
have lost nothing in the telling, it is probable that
they have not always been reported by him correctly.
</p>

<p>
In one respect, at all events, this mythical history
of Egypt is the creation of Herodotos himself and
not of his guides. This is the order in which he has
arranged the kings. It is the order in which he
visited the monuments to which the dragomen
attached their names, and it thus throws a welcome
light on the course of his movements. With this
clue in our hands we can follow him from one part of
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
the temple of Ptah to another, and can trace his
footsteps as far as the Fayyûm.
</p>

<p>
It is true he asserts that his list of kings was
given on the authority of <q>the Egyptians and the
priests,</q> and that it was they who reckoned three
hundred and forty-one generations from Menes, the
founder of the kingdom, to Sethos, the antagonist of
Sennacherib, the number of kings and high-priests
during the period being exactly equal to the number
of generations. But it can easily be shown that the
calculation was made by Herodotos himself, and that
neither the <q>Egyptians,</q> whose language he did not
understand, nor the sacristans, whom he dignifies with
the title of priests, are in any way responsible for the
absurd statement that a generation and a reign are
equivalent terms. The number of kings whose names
he heard from his dragoman is exactly eleven; in
addition to these, he tells us, the names of three
hundred and thirty kings were read to him from a
papyrus roll by one of the temple scribes; so that the
number three hundred and forty-one is obtained by
adding the three hundred and thirty names to the
eleven which were furnished him by his guides.
Among the three hundred and thirty must have
been included some of the latter, though the Greek
traveller did not know it.
</p>

<p>
At Memphis Herodotos learned that Menes was
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
the first king of united Egypt, though the further
statements he records in regard to him are not easily
reconcilable one with the other. On the one hand
he was informed that in his time all Egypt was a
marsh except the Thebaic nome&mdash;a piece of information
which seemed to Herodotos consonant with fact&mdash;on
the other hand, that the land on which Memphis
was built was a sort of huge embankment reclaimed
from the Nile by Menes, who forced the river to leave
its old channel under the plateau of Gizeh and to run
in its present bed. Mariette believed that the dyke
by means of which the first of the Pharaohs effected
this change in the course of the river still exists near
Kafr el-Ayyât, and it is geologically clear that the
Nile once ran along the edge of the Libyan desert,
and that the rock out of which the Sphinx was
carved must have been one of those which jutted
out into the stream.
</p>

<p>
But it was not on account of his engineering
works that the name of Menes has been preserved in
the histories of Herodotos. It was because he was
the founder of the temple of Ptah and the city of
Memphis. The temple which was the object of the
tourist's visit owed its origin to him, and the traveller's
sight-seeing naturally began with the mention of his
name.
</p>

<p>
Before Herodotos could be shown round such
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
parts of the sanctuary as were accessible to strangers,
it was necessary that he should be introduced to the
authorities and receive their permission to visit it.
Accordingly he was ushered into what was perhaps
the library of the temple, and there a scribe read to
him out of a roll the names of the three hundred and
thirty kings, beginning with Menes and ending with
Mœris. To three only does a story seem to have
been attached, either by the scribe or by the interpreter,
and only three names therefore did Herodotos
enter in his note-book. The first of these was that
of Menes, the second that of Nitôkris, the third that
of Mœris. Nitôkris was celebrated not only because
she was the one native woman who had ruled the
country, but also because she had treacherously
avenged the death of her brother and then flung
herself into the flames. Neit-aker, as she was called
in Egyptian, was actually an historical personage;
she was the last sovereign of the sixth dynasty, but
was very far from being the only queen who had
reigned over Egypt. As regards Mœris the statements
of Herodotos are only partially correct. He is
said to have built the propylæa on the north side of
the temple of Ptah, to have dug the great lake of
the Fayyûm, and to have erected the pyramids which
Herodotos believed he had seen standing in the
middle of it. Mœris, however, was not the name of
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
a king, but the Egyptian words Mi ur or <q>great lake</q>;
the Fayyûm was not created by the excavation of
an artificial reservoir, but by banking out the water
which had filled the oasis from geological times;
and the monuments seen by Herodotos were not
pyramids, but statues on pyramidal bases erected
by Amon-em-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> of the twelfth dynasty in front
of an ancient temple. Nor could any educated
Egyptian have alleged that a king of the twelfth
dynasty, who was not even the last monarch of that
dynasty itself, closed the line of the Pharaohs. The
whole account must rest on a combination of the
Greek historian's own erroneous conclusions with the
misinterpreted statements of the Egyptian <q>priest.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mœris, in the topographical chronology of
Herodotos, was followed by Sesostris, but this was
because the tourist, after leaving the scribe's chamber,
first visited the northern side of the temple. Here
stood the two colossal figures of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> in front
of the entrance, which, after centuries of neglect and
concealment, have again become objects of interest.
The larger one, forty-two feet in length, was discovered
in 1820 and presented by Mohammed Ali to
the British Government, but, as might have been
expected, was never claimed. For years it lay on
its face in the mud and water, but in 1883 Major
Bagnold turned it round and raised it, and finally
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
placed it in the shed, where it is now safe from
further injury. The son and daughter of the Pharaoh
were originally represented standing beside him.
Major Bagnold also brought to light the companion
statue, of lesser height and of a different stone. This
is in a better state of preservation, and has been set
up on a hillock by the side of a stêlê which was
discovered at the same time. Fragments of papyri
inscribed with Greek and demotic have been found
at the north-eastern foot of the hillock, and it may
be that they mark the site of the chamber where
Herodotos listened to the words of the roll.
</p>

<p>
Northward of the colossi was the sacred lake,
said to have been formed by Menes, and now a
stagnant pond. At its south-eastern corner the foundations
have recently been laid bare of small square
rooms, the walls of which have been adorned with
sculptures. But the waters of the inundation have
followed the excavators, and the walls are fast
perishing under the influence of moisture and nitrous
salt.
</p>

<p>
About Sesostris the guides of Herodotos had a
good deal to say. But nothing of it was history&mdash;not
even his conquests in Europe and Scythia, his excavation
of the canals which rendered Egypt unfit
for horses and chariots, his equal division of the land
among his subjects, or his having been the sole
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
Egyptian monarch who governed Ethiopia. How
even a dragoman of Memphis could have imagined
that it had ever been possible to cultivate the
Egyptian soil without canals it is difficult to understand,
and still more difficult to imagine how a
traveller who had seen the Delta could have believed
a statement of the kind. The only explanation can
be that Herodotos never saw the Delta in its normal
condition when the inundation had ceased to cover
the land. That Sesostris should have been supposed
to have been the only Pharaoh who established his
power in Ethiopia is but a proof how little was
known of the real history of Egypt by either
Herodotos or his informants.
</p>

<p>
The origin of the name given to this Pharaoh of
the dragoman's imagination is still a puzzle. The
statues in front of the temple of Ptah, to which the
name was attached, were set up by Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, and
in a papyrus we find the name Sesetsu given as the
popular title of the same monarch. Perhaps it
means <q>the son of Set is he.</q> We know that Set,
the ancient god of the Delta, was a special object of
worship in the family of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, and his father
Seti was named after the god. Sesetsu would correspond
with fair exactitude to the Sesoôsis of
Diodoros; for Sesostris we should have to presuppose
the form Sesetsu-Ra.
</p>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<p>
The son and successor of Sesostris, according to
Herodotos, was Pherôn. The name is merely a
mispronounced Pharaoh, the Egyptian Per-âa or
<q>Great House.</q> Pherôn undertook no military expedition,
being blind in consequence of his impiety
in hurling his spear at too high a Nile. After ten
years of blindness an oracle came to him from Butô
that he would be cured if he would wash his eyes
in the urine of a woman who had been true to her
husband. Trial after trial was made in vain, and
when at last the king recovered his sight he collected
all the women in whose case he had failed into <q>a city
now called the Red Mound,</q> and there burnt them,
city and all. He then erected the two obelisks which
stood in front of the temple of Ra at Heliopolis.
</p>

<p>
There are many <q>Red Mounds</q> in Egypt, and
the name Kom el-Ahmar or <q>Red Mound</q> is accordingly
very plentiful in a modern map of the country.
Wherever kiln-baked bricks have been used in the
construction of a building, or where the wall or
houses of a city have been burnt, the mound of ruins
to which they give rise is of a reddish colour. Such
a mound must have existed in the neighbourhood of
Heliopolis in the days of Herodotos. There is still
a Kom el-Ahmar close to Tel el-Yehudîyeh, where
the Jewish temple of Onias was built. But <q>the Red
Mound</q> of the guides was probably one that was
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
visible from the pylon of the great temple of Heliopolis,
where the obelisks stood with which the story
of it was associated. The obelisks had indeed been
erected by a <q>Pharaoh,</q> but it was not a son of
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> They had been set up by Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> of the
twelfth dynasty nearly fifteen centuries before
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> was born.
</p>

<p>
As Pherôn was the son of Sesostris it was necessary
for Herodotos to introduce him into his list immediately
after his father, even though he had left
no monument behind him in the temple of Memphis.
But after Pherôn he returns to his series of <q>Memphite</q>
kings. This time it is <q>a Memphite whose
Greek name is Prôteus,</q> and whose shrine was situated
in the midst of <q>the Tyrian Camp</q> or settlement
on the <q>south side of the temple of Ptah.</q> The
tourist, therefore, walked round the eastern wall of
the great temple from north to south, and as the
pylon on this side of the sanctuary was connected
with the name of a king who was the builder of a
brick pyramid seen on the way to the Fayyûm, an
account of it is deferred till later. The next monument
Herodotos came to was accordingly of Phœnician
and not of Egyptian origin.
</p>

<p>
Prôteus in fact was a Phœnician god, worshipped,
Herodotos tells us, along with the foreign Aphroditê,
whom he suspects to be the Greek Helen in disguise.
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
The Phœnician Aphroditê, however, was really Ashtoreth,
which the Greeks pronounced Astartê, the
Istar of the Babylonians and Assyrians. But the
<q>priests,</q> or rather the guides of the traveller, were
equal to the occasion, and on his asking them concerning
Helen they at once gave him a long story
about her arrival and adventures in Egypt. Prôteus
was at the time the king in Memphis, and not the
sea-god of ships and prophetic insight, as Homer had
imagined, and he very properly took Helen away
from Paris and kept her safely till Menelaos arrived
after the Trojan war to claim his wife. Accordingly
Prôteus, the Phœnician <q>old man of the sea,</q> has
gone down among the three hundred and forty-one
Pharaohs of Egypt whose names were recounted
to Herodotos by the <q>priests.</q> There could not be
a better illustration of the real character of his
<q>priestly</q> informants, or of the worthlessness of the
information which they gave him.
</p>

<p>
When, however, Herodotos goes on to assert that
<q>they said</q> that Rhampsinitos succeeded Prôteus in
the kingdom, he is dealing with them unjustly. The
supposed fact must have come from his own note-book.
After visiting the Tyrian Camp, on the south
side of the great temple, the traveller was taken to its
western entrance, where he was told that the propylæa
had been erected by Rhampsinitos, as well as two
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
colossal statues in front of them. The order in which
he saw the monuments determined the order in
which the names of Prôteus and Rhampsinitos occurred
in his note-book, and the order in his note-book
determined the order of their succession.
</p>

<p>
Rhampsinitos represents a real Egyptian king.
He is Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> of the twentieth dynasty, the last
of the conquering Pharaohs, and the builder of
Medînet Habu at Thebes. But Herodotos was never
at Thebes, and had consequently never heard of the
superb temple and palace Ramses had built there.
All that he knows of the architectural works of the
Pharaoh are the insignificant additions he made to
the temple of Memphis. Of the real Pharaoh he is
equally ignorant. In place of the vanquisher of the
hordes of the north, the monarch who annihilated the
invaders from the Ægean and captured or sunk their
ships, the conqueror who carried his arms into
Palestine and Syria, we have the hero of a folk-tale.
Rhampsinitos and his treasury have become the
subject of the story of the master-thief, a story which
in various forms is found all over the world, and
perhaps goes back to the infancy of mankind. Why
this story should have been attached to Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>
it is just as impossible for us to know as it is to
understand why the name of Neit, the goddess of
Sais and the twenty-sixth dynasty, should have been
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
combined with that of the Theban Pharaoh of the
twentieth. Rhampsinitos, Ramessu-n-Neit or <q>Ramses
of Neit,</q> indicates the period in which alone the name
could have been formed. It must have been the invention
of the Karian dragomen who came into
existence under the Saitic dynasty.
</p>

<p>
Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> was, however, as we learn from the
great Harris papyrus, one of the wealthiest of
Egyptian princes. The gifts he made to the
temples of the gods, more especially to that of Amon
of Thebes, are almost fabulous in amount. His
trading ships brought him the wares of the south and
north; and the gold-mines of the eastern desert, as
well as the copper and malachite mines of the province
of Mafkat, the Sinaitic Peninsula of our
modern maps, were actively worked in his reign.
The chambers of one of his treasuries still exist at
Medînet Habu, and we can still see depicted on their
walls the vases of precious metal which he deposited
in them.
</p>

<p>
The Rhampsinitos of folk-lore was similarly rich.
He built a treasury for his wealth beside his palace,
which should secure it against all attempts at robbery.
But the architect left in it a stone which could
be easily removed by any one who knew its secret,
and before he died the secret was communicated
to his two sons. To the amazement of the king,
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
therefore, the gold began to disappear, though his seals
remained unbroken and the doors fast locked. He
set a trap, accordingly, by the side of the chests of
gold; and one of the thieves was caught in it. He
thereupon induced his brother to cut off his head,
so that his body might not be recognised, and to
decamp with it. Next morning Rhampsinitos found
the headless corpse, which was thereupon exposed
to public view under the protection of armed
guards, who were ordered to arrest whoever showed
any signs of recognising it. The mother of the
dead man, frantic at the treatment of his body,
which would deprive him of all hope in the next
world, threatened to disclose the whole story unless
her surviving son could secure his brother's corpse
and give it honourable burial. Loading several
asses with wine-skins, therefore, he drove them past
the place where the guards sat over the corpse.
There he allowed some of the wine to escape,
accidentally as it were, and when the guards began
eagerly to drink it he craftily encouraged them to do
so until they had all fallen into a drunken sleep.
He then seized the body and carried it to his mother.
The king was now more than ever desirous of discovering
such a master-thief, and ordered his daughter
to adopt the Babylonian custom of sitting in public
and admitting the attentions of any one who passed
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
on condition that he told her the cleverest trick he
had ever performed. The thief provided himself
with the arm of a mummy, which he concealed
under his cloak, and thus prepared presented himself
to the princess and disclosed to her all he had done.
As she tried to seize him, he left the dead man's arm
in her hand and escaped. The king, struck with admiration,
determined that so exceedingly clever a
youth should be his own son-in-law, and issued a
proclamation not only pardoning him but allowing
him to marry his daughter. Such was the way
in which Egyptian history was constructed by the
combined efforts of the popular imagination, the
foreign dragomen, and Herodotos!
</p>

<p>
After all, however, the master-thief did not
succeed Rhampsinitos on the throne. After passing
the western entrance of the temple of Ptah, Herodotos
arrived again at the northern side, from which
he had started, and, as he was not allowed to enter
the sanctuary, there was nothing further for him to
see. His next visit, accordingly, was to the pyramids
of Gizeh, and the pyramidal builders&mdash;Kheops,
Khephren, and Mykerinos of the fourth dynasty&mdash;are
made to follow Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> of the twentieth,
who lived more than two thousand years after them.
It does not say much for the judgment of our classical
scholars that before the decipherment of the
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
hieroglyphs they should have preferred the chronology
of Herodotos to that of Manetho.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos, like a true sight-seer, found nothing
in Memphis to interest him except the temple.
About the city itself he has nothing to say, not even
about the stuccoed city-wall which gave to it its
name of <q>the White Wall.</q> Portions of this wall are
still standing at the northern end of the mounds
which cover the site of Memphis. Like all the other
city-walls of ancient Egypt, it is built of sun-dried
bricks, bound together with the stems of palm-trees,
and was once of great thickness. At the southern
end of the mounds are the remains of the kilns in
which the potters of the Roman and Byzantine
age baked their vases of blue porcelain. Some of
their failures still lie on the surface of the ground.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos went to the pyramids of Gizeh by
water, across the lake on the western side of the city,
which he states had been made by Menes, and then
along a canal. At Gizeh his love of the marvellous
was fully satisfied. He inspected the pyramids and
the causeway along which the stones had been
brought from the quarries of Turah for building
them, and listened reverentially to all the stories
which his guides told him about them and their
builders. The measurements he gives were in most
cases probably made by himself. But in saying that
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
there were hieroglyphic inscriptions <q>in the pyramid</q>
he has made a mistake. There were no inscriptions
either in it or outside it, unless it were a few hieratic
records left by visitors on the lower casing-stones of
the monument. At the same time it is certain that
Herodotos saw the hieroglyphs, and that his guide pretended
to translate them, since they contained, according
to him, an account of the quantity of radishes,
onions, and leeks eaten by the workmen when
building the great pyramid, as well as the amount
of money which it cost. But the vegetables represented
Egyptian characters&mdash;the radish, for instance,
being probably <foreign rend='italic'>rod</foreign>, <q>fruit</q> or <q>seed,</q> and the mention
of them is a proof that it really was a hieroglyphic
text which the dragoman proposed to interpret. It
is even possible that the guide knew the hieroglyphic
symbols for the numerals; if so, it would explain
his finding in them the number of talents spent by
Kheops upon his sepulchre, and it would also show that
the inscriptions were engraved, not <q>in the pyramid,</q>
but in an adjoining tomb. In fact, this seems the
simplest explanation of what Herodotos says about
them; like many another traveller, he forgot to
note where exactly the inscriptions were inscribed,
and when he came to write his book assumed that
they were in the pyramid itself.
</p>

<p>
According to the dragoman's legend, Kheops and
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
Khephren were cruel and impious tyrants, while
their successor Mykerinos (Men-ka-Ra) was a good
and merciful ruler. The key to this description of
them is probably to be found in the statement of
Diodorus Siculus that the people threatened to drag
their bodies from their tombs after death and tear
them in pieces, so that through fear of such a fate
the Pharaohs took care to have themselves buried in
a secret place. This secret place is the subterranean
island, with its chambers, which Herodotos says
was made under the great pyramid by means of a
canal in order that the king might be entombed
there. The myth must have originated in the fact
that in the days of Herodotos the mummies of
Kheops and Khephren were not to be found in their
pyramids, which had been rifled centuries before,
and the story of the cruelty and impiety of the
two kings accordingly grew up to account for the
fact.
</p>

<p>
The righteousness of Mykerinos was visited with
the anger and punishment of the gods, since it had
been destined that the Egyptians should be evil-entreated
for one hundred and fifty years, and his
piety and justice had averted from them part of their
doom. This view of destiny and the action of the
gods was as essentially Greek as it was foreign to
the Egyptian mind, and it is not surprising therefore
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
that the decree of heaven was announced to the
unhappy Pharaoh through that thoroughly Greek
institution, an oracle. We are reading in the story
a Greek tragedy rather than a history of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
It was part of the punishment of Mykerinos that
he should lose his daughter, and the dragomen thus
managed to connect the pyramid at Gizeh with a
gilded wooden image of a cow in the palace at Sais,
which, since the reign of Psammetikhos, must have
been well-known to them. The cow, which was
really a symbol of Neit in the form of Hathor, with
what Herodotos supposed to be the disk of the sun
between its horns, though it was really the moon,
was imagined to be hollow, and to be the coffin
of the daughter of the Pharaoh. The wooden
figures which stood beside it were further imagined
to represent the concubines of the king. There
were, however, other stories about both the figures
and the cow, less reputable to the royal character,
but equally showing how entirely ignorant Herodotos's
informants were of Egyptian religion and
custom. Though they knew that at the festival of
Osiris the cow was carried out into the open air, they
said this was because the daughter of Mykerinos
when dying had asked her father that she might
once a year see the sun. Can there be a stronger
proof of the gulf that existed between the native
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
Egyptian and the <q>impure</q> stranger, even when the
latter belonged to the caste of dragomen? To us
the representation of Hathor under the form of a
cow with the lunar orb between its horns seems an
elementary fact of ancient Egyptian religion; the
modern tourist sees it depicted time after time on
the walls of temples and tombs, and the modern
dragoman has begun to learn something about its
meaning. But in the fifth century before our era the
dragoman and the tourist were alike foreigners, who
were not permitted to penetrate within the temples,
and there were neither books nor teachers to instruct
them in the doctrines of the Egyptian faith.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos must have returned to Memphis after
his visit to the pyramids, before setting forth on his
voyage to the south. Had he gone straight from
Gizeh to the Fayyûm along the edge of the desert,
he would have passed the step-pyramid and the
Serapeum at Saqqâra. It is difficult to believe that,
had he done so, he would have told us nothing about
the burial-place of the sacred bulls and the huge
sarcophagi of granite in which they were entombed.
The subterranean gallery begun by Psammetikhos
was still open, and each Apis as he died was buried
in it down to the end of the Ptolemaic period. At
a later date, when the Persian empire had been
overthrown, the Serapeum became a favourite place
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
of pilgrimage for Greek visitors to Memphis. A
Greek temple was built over the sepulchres of the
bulls, Greek recluses took up their abode in its
chambers, and Greek tourists inscribed their names
on the sphinxes which lined the approach to the
sanctuary.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos knew all about the living Apis, and
the marks on the body of the bull which proved his
divinity, as well as about the court in the temple
of Ptah at Memphis, which Psammetikhos had built
for the accommodation of the incarnate god. He
was well acquainted also with the legend which
made Kambyses slay the sacred bull and scourge
its priests, and he tells us how the latter buried the
body of their slaughtered deity in secret. But
neither he nor his guides knew where the burial
took place, or where the mummies of the bulls had
been entombed from time immemorial. Had they
done so we should have heard something about it.
But, instead of this, we are told that the dead oxen
were buried in the suburbs of the town where they
had died, their horns being allowed to protrude
above the ground in order to mark the spot. When
the flesh was decayed the bones were conveyed in
boats to a city in the island of Prosôpitis, called
Atarbêkhis, and there deposited in their last resting-place.
</p>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<p>
It is evident, therefore, that the great cemetery
of Memphis was not visited by travellers, and that
the guides accordingly knew nothing about it. The
Egyptians probably had the same feeling in regard
to it as their Moslem descendants; the graves would
be profaned if the <q>impure</q> foreigner walked over
them. The <q>impure</q> foreigner, moreover, was
usually satisfied with the three pyramids of Gizeh;
he did not care to make another long expedition in
the sun to the western desert in order to see there
another pyramid. And, apart from the pyramid,
there was little for him to visit. It is doubtful
whether he would have been permitted to descend
into the burying-place of the bulls, and the buildings
above it were probably of no great size.
</p>

<p>
But whatever might have been the reason,
Saqqâra and its Serapeum were unknown to the
dragomen, and consequently to Herodotos as well.
He must have started for the Fayyûm from Memphis
and have sailed up the channel of the Nile itself.
If he noticed the pyramids of Dahshûr and Mêdûm,
they would have been in the far distance, and have
appeared unworthy of attention after what he had
seen at Gizeh. Soon after passing Mêdûm, however,
it would have been necessary for him to leave the
river and make his way inland by the canal which
joined the Bahr Yûsuf at Illahûn. Here he would
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
have been close to the great brick pyramid whose
secret has been wrested from it by Professor Petrie,
and here too he would have seen, a little to the
south, the city of Herakleopolis, the Ahnas el-Medîneh
of to-day, standing on the rubbish-mounds
of the past on the eastern bank of the Bahr Yûsuf.
</p>

<p>
Herakleopolis, called Hininsu in Egyptian and
the cuneiform inscriptions, was the capital of a nome
which the Greek writers describe as an island. It
was, in fact, enclosed on all sides by the water. On
the east is the Nile; on the west the Bahr Yûsuf,
itself probably an old channel of the river; northward
a canal unites the two great streams, while southward
another canal (or perhaps a branch of the river)
once did the same in the neighbourhood of Ahnas.
Strabo still speaks of it as a great <q>island</q> which he
passed through on his way to the Fayyûm from the
north.
</p>

<p>
The route followed by Strabo must have been
that already traversed by Herodotos. He too must
have passed through the island of Hininsu on his
way to the Fayyûm, and his scheme of Egyptian
chronology ought to contain evidence of the fact.
</p>

<p>
And this is actually the case. Mykerinos, he
teaches us, was succeeded by a king named Sasykhis
or Asykhis, who built not only the eastern propylon
of the temple of Ptah at Memphis, but also a brick
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
pyramid, about which, of course, his guides had a
characteristic story to tell him. That the story was
of Greek origin is shown by the inscription, which
they professed had been engraved by order of the
Pharaoh, but which only a Greek could have invented.
The brick pyramid must have been that
of Illahûn. The two brick pyramids of Dahshûr
would have been invisible from the river, and even
to a visitor on the spot the state of ruin in which
they are would have made them seem of little
consequence. His attention would have been wholly
absorbed by the massive pyramids of stone at the
foot of which they stand.
</p>

<p>
The brick pyramid of Howâra, again, cannot be
the one meant by Herodotos. It formed part of the
buildings connected with the Labyrinth, the size
and splendour of which overshadowed in his eyes
all the rest. There remains, therefore, only the brick
pyramid of Illahûn, by the side of which, as we have
seen, the voyage of Herodotos would have led
him.
</p>

<p>
The pyramid of Illahûn, when seen near at hand,
is indeed a very striking object. It is the only one
of the brick pyramids which challenges comparison
with the pyramids of stone, and may well have given
occasion for the story which was repeated to the
Greek tourist. Its striking character is due to the
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
fact that the brick superstructure is raised upon a
plateau of rock, which has been cut into shape to
receive it. The excavations of Professor Petrie in
1890 revealed the name of its builder. This was
Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> of the twelfth dynasty, the king in
the sixth year of whose reign the <q>Asiatics</q> arrived
with their tribute of antimony as depicted in the
tomb of Khnum-hotep at Beni-Hassan. How the
guides came to call him Sasykhis is difficult to
explain. Perhaps it is the Egyptian Sa-Sovk, <q>the
son of Sovk</q> or <q>Sebek</q> the crocodile-god of the
Fayyûm, whom the Greeks termed Sûkhos. The
Pharaohs of the twelfth dynasty, as creators and
benefactors of the Fayyûm, the nome of the crocodile,
were specially devoted to its worship, and in their
inscriptions they speak of the works they had undertaken
for their <q>father Sovk.</q>
</p>

<p>
After Sasykhis, Herodotos continues, <q>there
reigned a blind man named Anysis, from the city
of Anysis: while he was reigning the Ethiopians
and Sabako, king of Ethiopia, invaded Egypt with a
large force, so the blind man fled into the marshes,
and the Ethiopian ruled Egypt for fifty years.</q>
After his departure in consequence of a dream the
blind man returned from the marshes, where he had
lived in an artificial island called Elbô, which no
one could rediscover until Amyrtæos found it again.
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
Anysis, of course, is the name of a city, not of
a man, and, in making it both, Herodotos has committed
a similar mistake to that which he has made
in transforming Pi-Bast, <q>the temple of Bast,</q> and
Pi-Uaz, <q>the temple of Uaz,</q> into the names of his
goddesses Bubastis and Butô. It is, in fact, merely
the Greek form of the Hebrew Hanes, and the
Hebrew Hanes is the Egyptian Hininsu, which,
according to a well-known rule of Semitic and
Egyptian phonetics, was pronounced Hinissu. We
learn from the Book of Isaiah (xxx. 4) that Hanes
was playing a prominent part in Egyptian politics
at the very time when Sabako and his Ethiopians
occupied the country. The ambassadors of Hezekiah
who were sent from Jerusalem to ask the help
of the Egyptian monarch against the common
Assyrian enemy came not only to Zoan in the
Delta, but to Hanes as well. Zoan and Hanes must
have been for the moment the two centres of
Egyptian government and the seats of the Pharaoh's
court.
</p>

<p>
The intermittent glimpses that we get of Egyptian
history in the stormy period that preceded the
Ethiopian conquest show how this had come to be
the case. Shishak's dynasty, the twenty-second, had
been followed by the twenty-third, which Manetho
calls Tanite, and which, therefore, must have had its
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
origin in Zoan. While its second king, Osorkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>,
was reigning at Tanis and Bubastis, the first sign of
the coming Ethiopian invasion fell upon Egypt.
Piankhi Mi-Amon, the king of Napata, descended
the Nile, and called upon the rival princes of Egypt
to acknowledge him as their head. Osorkon, who
alone possessed a legitimate title to the supreme
sovereignty, seems to have obeyed the summons, but
it was resisted by two of the petty kings of Upper
Egypt, those of Ashmunên and Annas, as well as by
Tef-nekht or Tnêphakhtos, the prince of Sais.
Ashmunên and Ahnas were accordingly besieged,
and Ashmunên soon fell into the invader's hands.
Ahnas and the rest of the south thereupon submitted,
and Piankhi marched against Memphis. In spite of
the troops and provisions thrown into it by Tef-nekht,
the old capital of the country was taken by
storm, and all show of resistance to the conqueror
was at an end. From one extremity of the country to
the other the native rulers hastened to pay homage
to the Ethiopian and to accept his suzerainty.
</p>

<p>
Piankhi caused the account of his conquest to be
engraved on a great stêlê of granite which he set up
on Mount Barkal, the holy mountain of Napata.
Here he gives a list of the seventeen princes among
whom the cities of Egypt had been parcelled out,
and each of whom claimed independent or semi-independent
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
authority. Out of the seventeen, four
bear upon their foreheads the royal uræus, receive
the title of kings, and have their names enclosed in
a cartouche. Two of them are princes of the north,
Osorkon of Bubastis and Tanis, and Aupet of
Klysma, near Suez. The other two represent Upper
Egypt. One is the king of Sesennu or Ashmunên,
the other is Pef-dod-Bast of Hininsu or Ahnas.
Thebes is wholly ignored.
</p>

<p>
The conquest of Piankhi proved to be but momentary.
The Ethiopians retired, and Egypt returned
to the condition in which they found it. It was a
nation divided against itself, rent with internal wars
and private feuds, and ready to fall into the hands of
the first invader with military ability and sufficient
troops. Two states towered in it above the rest;
Tanis in the north and Ahnas in the south. Tanis
had succeeded to the patrimony of Bubastis and
Memphis; Ahnas to that of Thebes.
</p>

<p>
Sabako, therefore, fixed his court at Zoan and
Hanes, simply because they had already become the
leading cities, if not the capitals, of the north and the
south. And to Zoan and Hanes, accordingly, the
Jewish envoys had to make their way. The princes
of Judah assembled at Zoan; the ambassadors went
farther, even to Hanes. It is noteworthy that a
century later the Assyrian king Assur-bani-pal still
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
couples together the princes of Ahnas and Zoan in
his list of the satraps of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Anysis or Hanes was the extreme limit of
Herodotos's voyage. As afterwards in the days of
Strabo, it was the entrance to the Fayyûm, and the
traveller who wished to visit the Fayyûm had first
to pass through the city which the Greeks called
Herakleopolis. The patron-god of the city was Hershef,
whose name was the subject of various unsuccessful
attempts at an etymology on the part of the
Egyptians. But, like the names of several other deities,
its true origin was lost in the night of antiquity. In
Plutarch it appears in a Greek dress as Arsaphes.
The god was invested with warlike attributes, and
hence it was that he was identified by the Greeks
with their own Hêraklês. His temple stood in the
middle of the mounds of the old city, which the
<foreign rend='italic'>fellahin</foreign> call Umm el-Kimân, <q>the mother of mounds.</q>
In 1891 they were partially excavated by Dr. Naville
for the Egypt Exploration Fund, but little was found
to repay the expense and labour of the work. The
site of the temple was discovered somewhat to the
north-east of the four columns which are alone left
of an early Coptic church. But hardly more than
the site can be said still to exist. A few blocks of
stone inscribed with the names of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> and
Meneptah, and a fragment of a temple built by
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, are almost all that survive of its past.
Even the necropolis failed to produce monuments of
antiquity. Its tombs had been ransacked by treasure-hunters
and used again as places of burial in the
Roman era, and Dr. Naville found in it only a few
traces of the eighteenth dynasty.
</p>

<p>
And yet there had been a time when Herakleopolis
was the capital of Egypt. The ninth and tenth
dynasties sprang from it, and the authority of the
tenth dynasty, at all events, was, as we now know, acknowledged
as far as the Cataract. Professor Maspero
and Mr. Griffith have shown that three of the tombs
in the hill behind Assiout (Nos. <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>) belong
to that age. Hollowed out of the rock, high up in
the cliff above the tombs of the twelfth dynasty,
their mutilated inscriptions tell us of the ancient
feudal lords of the nome, Tef-aba and his son Khiti,
the latter of whom won battles for his master, the
Pharaoh Mer-ka-Ra. Thebes was in open rebellion;
so also was Herakleopolis itself, the home of the
Pharaoh's family, and Khiti provided ships and
soldiers in abundance for him. The fleet filled the
Nile from Gebel Abu Foda on the north to Shotb
on the south, and the forces of the rebels were
annihilated. For awhile the authority of the Pharaoh
was restored; but the power of the Theban princes
remained unshaken, and a time came when the
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
Thebans of the eleventh dynasty succeeded to the
heritage of the Herakleopolites of the tenth.
</p>

<p>
Who the <q>blind</q> king of Anysis may have been
we do not know. But he was certainly not the
legitimate Pharaoh, although Herakleopolite vanity
may have wished him to be thought so. According
to Manetho, the Tanites of the twenty-third dynasty
were followed by the twenty-fourth dynasty, consisting
of a single Saite, Bokkhoris, whom the monuments
call Bak-n-ran-f. Bokkhoris is said to have
been burnt alive by his conqueror Sabako. In making
the latter reign for fifty years, Herodotos has
confused the founder of the dynasty with the dynasty
itself. The length of his reign is variously given by
the two copyists of Manetho&mdash;Africanus and Eusebius&mdash;as
eight and twelve years; the last cypher can
alone be the right one, as an inscription at the gold
mines of Hammamât mentions his twelfth year.
He was followed by two other Ethiopian kings, the
second of whom was Tirhakah, and the whole length
of the dynasty seems to have been fifty-two years.
The Christian copyists, indeed, with their customary
endeavour to reduce the chronology of the Egyptian
historian, make it only forty and forty-four years;
but the monuments show that Herodotos, with his
round half century, is nearer the truth.
</p>

<p>
From a topographical point of view the
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
introduction of Sabako and the Ethiopian between
Ahnas and the Fayyûm is out of place. But the story
told to Herodotos prevented him from doing otherwise.
The blind king is said to have fled to the
marshes of the Delta, and there to have remained in
concealment until the end of the Ethiopian rule,
when he was once more acknowledged as Pharaoh.
The legend of Sabako is thus only an episode in
the history of the Herakleopolite prince.
</p>

<p>
From the blind Anysis we ought to pass to the
kings of the twelfth dynasty who created the Fayyûm
and erected the monuments which the Greek traveller
saw there. We do not do so for two reasons.
Herodotos had already mentioned king Mœris and
the lake and pyramids he made when describing the
list of kings which the sacred scribe had read to him
in Memphis. He could not count the Egyptian
monarch twice, at the beginning as well as the end of
his eleven topographical Pharaohs. Then, again, the
story told him about the Labyrinth connected its
origin with Psammetikhos, with whom the Greek
history of Egypt began. From this point forward
Herodotos no longer derived his information from
<q>the Egyptians themselves,</q> that is to say, from his
guides and dragomen, but <q>from the rest of the
world.</q> By <q>the rest of the world</q> he means the
Greeks. The story of the Labyrinth is accordingly
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
relegated to what may be termed the second division
of his Egyptian history, and forms part of his account
of the rise of the twenty-sixth dynasty.
</p>

<p>
Between the blind king of Ahnas, therefore, and
the supposed builder of the Labyrinth, a folk-tale is
interposed which once more takes us back to the
temple of Ptah at Memphis. It is attached to an
image in the temple, which represents a man with a
mouse in his hand, and it is evident that Herodotos
heard it after his return from the Fayyûm. Had he
heard of it when he was previously in Memphis, it
would have been recorded in an earlier part of his
book. Moreover, the statue stood within the temple,
which the tourist was not allowed to enter, so that he
would not have seen it at the time of his visit to the
great Egyptian sanctuary. Whether he ever saw it at
all is doubtful; perhaps he may have caught a glimpse
of it through the open gate of the temple like the
glimpses of sculptured columns in Mohammedan
mosques which the older travellers in the East have
boasted of securing. But more probably he heard
about it from others, more especially from the
dragoman he employed.
</p>

<p>
The story is a curious mixture of Egyptian and
Semitic elements, while the inscription which the
dragomen pretended to read upon the statue is a
Greek invention. A priest of Ptah, so it ran, whose
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
name was Sethos, became king of Egypt. His
priestly instincts led him to neglect and ill-treat the
army, even to the extent of robbing them of the
twelve acres of land which each soldier possessed of
right. Then Sennacherib, <q>king of the Arabians
and Assyrians,</q> marched against him, and the army
refused to fight. In his extremity the priest-king
entered the shrine of his god and implored him with
tears to save his worshipper. Sleep fell upon the
suppliant, and he beheld the god standing over him
and bidding him be of good courage, for no harm
should happen to him. Thereupon Sethos proceeded
to Pelusium with such volunteers as he could find&mdash;pedlars,
artisans, and tradesmen&mdash;and there found
the enemy encamped. In the night, however, field-mice
entered the camp of the Assyrians and gnawed
their bowstrings and the thongs of their shields, so
that in the morning they found themselves defenceless,
and the Egyptians gained an easy victory. In
memory of the event the stone image of the king
was erected in the temple of Ptah with a field-mouse
in his hand.
</p>

<p>
The statue must have been that of Horus, to
whom alone, along with Uaz, the field-mouse was
sacred. But it was apparently only in a few localities
that such was the case. The figure of the
animal is found on coins of Ekhmîm, and a bronze
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
image of it discovered at Thebes, and now in the
British Museum, is dedicated to <q>Horus, the lord of
Sekhem,</q> or Esneh. At <q>Buto,</q> where the two deities
were worshipped together, we may expect to find a
cemetery of field-mice like that of the cats at
Bubastis, and the Liverpool Museum possesses two
bronze mice, both on the same stand, which were
discovered in the mounds of Athribis near Benha.
Horus was the god of Athribis, where he was adored
under the name of Kheti-ti.
</p>

<p>
The priest-king of the folk-tale has taken the
place of the historical Tirhakah. The name of his
enemy, Sennacherib, however, has been remembered,
though he is called king of <q>the Arabians</q> as well
as of the Assyrians. But the title must be of
Egyptian origin. The <q>Arabians</q> of the Greek
writer are the Shasu, the Bedouin <q>plunderers</q> of
the Egyptian monuments, and none but an Egyptian
would have described an Asiatic invader by such
a name.
</p>

<p>
It was in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 701, during his campaign against
Hezekiah of Judah, that the Assyrian monarch met
the forces of Tirhakah. The Ethiopian lord of Egypt
had marched to the help of his Jewish ally, and at
the little village of Eltekeh the battle took place.
Tirhakah was defeated and driven back into Egypt,
while Sennacherib was left to continue his campaign
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
and reduce his rebellious vassal to obedience. In
the insolence of victory he sent Hezekiah a letter
declaring that, in spite of the promises of his God,
Jerusalem should be delivered into the hands of its
foes. Then it was that Hezekiah entered the
sanctuary of the temple, and, spreading out the letter
before the Lord, besought Him to save himself and
the city from the Assyrian invader. The prayer was
heard: Isaiah was commissioned to declare that the
Assyrian king should never come into Jerusalem;
and the Assyrian host perished mysteriously in a
single night.
</p>

<p>
Half-a-century later a similar event happened in
Assyria itself. Its king, Assur-bani-pal, surrounded
by insurgent enemies, was suddenly attacked by
Te-umman of Elam. While he was keeping the
festival of the goddess Istar at Arbela, a message
was brought to him from the Elamite monarch that
he was on his march to destroy Assyria and its gods.
Thereupon Assur-bani-pal went into the temple of
the goddess, and, bowing to the ground before her,
with tears implored her help. Istar listened to the
prayer, and that night a seer dreamed a dream
wherein she appeared and bade him announce to the
king that Istar of Arbela, with quivers behind her
shoulders and the bow and mace in her hand, would
fight in front of him and overthrow his foes. The
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
prophecy was fulfilled, and before long the Elamite
army was crushed, and the head of Te-umman sent
in triumph to Nineveh.
</p>

<p>
In Judah and Assyria we are dealing with
history, in the story of Sethos with a folk-tale, and it
is impossible therefore not to believe that the conduct
of the priest of Ptah has been modelled upon that of
Hezekiah and Assur-bani-pal. The basis of it is
Semitic rather than Egyptian; it would have been
told more appropriately of Sennacherib than of the
Egyptian Pharaoh. Perhaps it had its source
among the Phœnicians of the Tyrian camp at
Memphis, or even among the Egyptianised Jews
who carried Jeremiah into Egypt. Whatever may
have been its origin, it does not belong to the realm
of history.
</p>

<p>
Even with the appearance of Psammetikhos upon
the stage, the Egyptian history of Herodotos does
not yet commence. Before it can do so, he has to
finish his wanderings and his sight-seeing, to be quit
of his dragomen and of the topographical chronology
that he built upon their stories. Through
Herakleopolis lay the entrance to the Fayyûm,
and the Fayyûm united the folk-lore of the guides
with the sober history of the Greek epoch in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos knows that Psammetikhos was king of
Sais and that his father's name had been Necho.
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
But when he goes on to say that Necho had been
slain by the Ethiopian Sabako, and that Psammetikhos
himself had been driven in consequence
into Syria, he takes us into the domain of fiction and
not of fact. Necho had been one of twenty Egyptian
satraps under Esar-haddon and Assur-bani-pal, and
though he had once been carried in chains to
Assyria on a charge of treason, he had returned to
his government loaded with honours. Sabako had
been dead long before, and Tirhakah was vainly
endeavouring to drive the Assyrians and their vassal-satraps
out of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Still further from the truth was the legend which
associated Psammetikhos with the Fayyûm. When
the Egyptians had been <q>freed,</q> we are told, after the
reign of the priest of Ptah, there arose twelve kings
who divided the country between them. They
married into each other's families and swore an oath
ever to remain friends. By way of leaving a monument
of themselves they built the Labyrinth, with its
twelve courts, each court for a king, six of them
being on the north side and six on the south. But an
oracle had announced that this friendly intercourse
would be broken if ever one of them at their annual
gathering in the temple of Ptah should pour a libation
to the god from a bronze helmet. The prince
who did so would become king of all Egypt. This
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
untoward accident eventually occurred. Psammetikhos
on one occasion accidentally used his helmet in
place of the proper libation-bowl, and he was thereupon
chased away by his colleagues, first into the
marshes and then into Syria. An oracle, however,
again came to his help. It declared that he would
be avenged when men of bronze came from the sea,
and, taking the hint, he hired some Ionian and
Karian pirates, armed with bronze, who had landed
for the sake of plunder, and with their assistance
became undisputed master of Egypt. With this story
of the foundation of the twenty-sixth dynasty, the
Egyptian folk-lore of Herodotos came fitly to an end.
</p>

<p>
The twelve kings owe their origin to the twelve
courts of the Labyrinth. They are a reminiscence
of the twenty vassal-kings or satraps whom the
Assyrians appointed to govern the country, and
among whom Psammetikhos and his father had
been included. But even the twelve courts are not
altogether correct. We learn from Strabo that there
were many more than twelve&mdash;as many, in fact, as
were the nomes of Egypt. This makes us distrustful
of the further statement of Herodotos that
the halls contained one thousand five hundred
chambers above the ground, and one thousand five
hundred below. The information must have come
from the guides, and it is not likely that he verified
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
it. To count three thousand chambers would have
occupied at least a day.
</p>

<p>
In the time of Strabo it was known that the real
builder of the Labyrinth was Maindês, that is to say,
Mâ(t)-n-Ra, or Amon-em-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> of the twelfth
dynasty. The excavations of Professor Petrie at
Howâra in 1888 have proved the fact. He succeeded
in penetrating into the central chamber of the brick
pyramid which formed part of the building, and
there, deep in water, he found the sarcophagus and
the shattered fragments of some of the funerary
vases of the dead Pharaoh. They were all that had
been left by the spoilers of a long-past age, but they
were sufficient to show who the Pharaoh was. He
had not been buried alone. In another chamber
of the pyramid was the sarcophagus of his daughter
Neferu-Ptah, who must have died before the pyramid
was finally closed. The labyrinth itself has been
used as a quarry or burnt into lime long ago. On
its floor of hard plaster lie the chippings of the
stones which composed it, six feet in thickness, and
covering a far larger area than that of any other
Egyptian temple of which we know. There was
none other which could vie with it in size.
</p>

<p>
Amon-em-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> seems to have left another
memorial of himself further north&mdash;at least, such
is the natural interpretation of Mr. de Morgan's
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
recent discoveries at Dahshûr. Though the pyramid
did not repay his engineering skill with even a scrap
of inscription, he found tombs on its northern side
which prove that here also was a burial-place of the
twelfth dynasty. Two long corridors had been cut
out of the rock, one above the other, and at intervals
along their northern walls square chambers had been
excavated, in which were placed the sarcophagi of
the dead. Inscriptions show for whom they were
intended. Nofer-hont, Sont-Senebt, Sit-Hathor and
Menit, were the royal princesses who had been
entombed within them in the time of Amon-em-hat
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Their jewels had been hidden in two natural
hollows in the stone floor of the corridors, and had
thus escaped the eye of the ancient treasure-hunter.
We can see them now in the Gizeh Museum, and
thus learn to what an exquisite state of perfection
the art of the goldsmith had already been brought.
</p>

<p>
Among them we may notice large sea-shells of
solid gold, enamelled lotus-flowers and necklaces of
amethyst, carnelian and agate beads. Of beautifully-worked
gold ornaments there is a marvellous profusion.
But nothing surpasses the golden pectorals
inlaid with precious stones. The work is so perfect
as to make it difficult to believe that we have before
us a mosaic and not enamel. On one of the
pectorals the cartouche of Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> is supported
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
on the paws of two hawk-headed lions, crowned with
the royal feathers, and trampling under their feet the
bodies of the foe. On another Amon-em-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> is
represented smiting the wild tribes of the Sinaitic
Peninsula. By the side of this jewellery of the
twelfth dynasty, that of Queen Ah-hotep of the
seventeenth, found by Mariette at Thebes, looks
formal and degenerate. In jewellery, as in all things
else in ancient Egypt, the earlier art is the best.
</p>

<p>
From Amon-em-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> of the twelfth dynasty
to the founder of the twenty-sixth, two thousand
years later, is a far cry, and how the Labyrinth came
to be connected with the latter by the guides of
Herodotos it is hard to say. The bronze helmet of
Psammetikhos indicates that the story is of Greek
origin. That was a Greek head-dress; no Egyptian,
much less an Egyptian Pharaoh, would ever have
worn it. The head-dress of the Egyptian monarch
was of linen, coloured red for Lower Egypt, white
for the south.
</p>

<p>
Herodotos seems to have visited Howâra from
the capital of the Fayyûm, much as a traveller would
do to-day. At least, such is the inference which we
may draw from his words. Its position is defined
as being <q>a little above Lake Mœris, near the city
of the Crocodiles.</q> But we must remember that
the Lake Mœris of the Greek tourist included not
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
only the actual lake, but also the inundation, which
covered at the time the cultivated land of the
Fayyûm. Nor was it, as he supposed, an artificial
piece of water excavated in a district which was
<q>terribly waterless,</q> the excavators of which were
wasteful enough to fling all the earth they had
extracted into the Nile twenty miles away. It was,
on the contrary, an oasis reclaimed from marsh and
water by the wise engineering labours of the kings
of the twelfth dynasty and the embankments which
they caused to be erected. So far from destroying
the precious cultivable ground by turning it into a
lake, they drained the lake so far as was possible,
and thereby created a new Egypt for the cultivators
of the soil.
</p>

<p>
From the walls of the city of the Crocodiles
Herodotos looked out over a vast expanse of water,
which he thought was the creation of the Pharaohs,
but which was really the result of man's neglect.
The dykes were broken which should have kept
back the flood and prevented it from swamping the
summer crops. It was with this view of almost
boundless waters that the journey of Herodotos up
the Nile came to an end. He returned to Memphis,
and from thence pursued the way along which we
have followed him to Pelusium and the sea. His
note-book was filled with memoranda of all the
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
wonders he had seen; of the strange customs he had
observed among the Egyptian people; above all, with
the folk-tales which his guides had poured into his
ear. At a later day, when his eastern travels were
over, and he had leisure for the work, he combined
all this with the accounts written by his predecessors,
and added a new book to the libraries of ancient
Greece. From the outset it was a success, and
though malicious critics endeavoured to condemn
and supersede it, though Thukydides contradicted
its statements in regard to Athens, though Ktêsias
declared that its oriental history was a romance and
Plutarch discoursed on the <q>malignity</q> of its author,
the book survived all attacks. We have lost the
work of Hekatæos of Miletos, we have lost also&mdash;what
is a more serious misfortune&mdash;that of the
careful and well-informed Hekatæos of Abdera, but
we still have Herodotos with us. And in spite of
our own knowledge and his ignorance, in spite even
of his innocent vanity and appropriation of the
words of others, it is a pleasure to travel with him
in our hand and visit with him the scenes he saw.
Nowhere else can we find the folk-lore which grew
and flourished in the meeting-place of East and
West more than two thousand years ago, and in
which lay the germs of much of the folk-lore of our
own childhood. It may even be that some of the
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
stories which the modern dragoman relates to the
modern traveller on the Nile have no better parentage
than the guides of Herodotos. Cairo is the
successor of Memphis, and 'the caste' of the
dragomen is not yet extinct.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendices.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix I.</head>

<div>
<head>The Egyptian Dynasties According To Manetho
(As Quoted By Julius Africanus, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 220), Etc.</head>

<p>
[The excerpts of Africanus are known from George the
Synkellos (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 790) and Eusebius (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 326): where
Eusebius differs from Synkellos the fact is stated.]
</p>

<p>
(Each king is followed by the number of years reigned.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty i.</hi>&mdash;Thinites: 8 kings.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Menes</cell><cell>62</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Athôthis his son</cell><cell>57</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Kenkenes his son</cell><cell>31</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Ouenephes his son</cell><cell>23</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Ousaphaidos his son (Ousaphaes, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>20</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Miebidos his son (Niebaes, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Semempses his son</cell><cell>18</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Biênakhes his son (Oubienthes or Vibethis, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>253</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>252</cell></row>
<row><cell>Really</cell><cell>263)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty ii.</hi>&mdash;Thinites: 9 kings.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Boêthos (Bôkhos, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>38</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Kaiekhôs (Khoos or Kekhous, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>39</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Binôthris (Biophis, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>47</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Tlas (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>17</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Sethenês (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Khaires (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>17</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Nepherkheres</cell><cell>25</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Sesôkhris</cell><cell>48</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Kheneres (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>30</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>302</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>297)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty iii.</hi>&mdash;Memphites: 9 kings.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Nekherophes (Nekherôkhis, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>28</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Tosorthros (Sesorthos, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>29</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Tyreis (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Mesôkhris (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>17</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Sôyphis (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>16</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Tosertasis (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>19</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Akhes (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>42</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Sêphouris (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>30</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Kerpheres (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>214</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>197)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty iv.</hi>&mdash;Memphites: 8 kings. (<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 17.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Sôris (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>29</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Souphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> (3rd king of the dynasty, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>63</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Souphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>66</cell></row>
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
<row><cell>4. Menkheres (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>63</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Ratoises (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>25</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Bikheris (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>22</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Seberkheres (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Thamphthis (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>277</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>448</cell></row>
<row><cell>Really</cell><cell>284)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty v.</hi>&mdash;Elephantines: 9 kings.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 31 kings, including Othoês or Othius the First
and Phiôps; the others are unnamed.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Ouserkheres</cell><cell>28</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Sephres</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Nepherkheres</cell><cell>20</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Sisires or Sisikhis</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Kheres or Ekheres</cell><cell>20</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Rathoures</cell><cell>44</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Menkheres</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Tankheres</cell><cell>44</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Ounos or Obnos</cell><cell>33</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>248</cell></row>
<row><cell>(Really</cell><cell>218)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty vi.</hi>&mdash;Memphites: 6 kings.
(No number in <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Othoês</cell><cell>30</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Phios</cell><cell>53 (or 3)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Menthu-Souphis</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Phiôps (lived 100 years)</cell><cell>94</cell></row>
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
<row><cell>5. Menthe-Souphis</cell><cell>1</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Nitôkris, a queen</cell><cell>12</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>160</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>245)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty vii.</hi>&mdash;70 Memphites for 70 days.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 5 kings for 75 days, or 75 years according to
the Armenian Version.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty viii.</hi>&mdash;27 Memphites for 146 years.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 5 kings for 100 years, or 9 kings according to
the Armenian Version.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty ix.</hi>&mdash;19 Herakleopolites for 409 years.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 4 kings for 100 years.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Akhthoes</cell><cell>?</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty x.</hi>&mdash;19 Herakleopolites for 185 years.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xi.</hi>&mdash;16 Thebans for 43 years, after whom
Ammenemes reigned 16 years.
</p>

<p>
End of Manetho's first book, the kings of the first eleven
dynasties reigning altogether 2300 years (<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 2200) and
70 days (really 2287 years and 70 days).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xii.</hi>&mdash;Thebans: 7 kings.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Sesonkhôsis, son of Ammenemes</cell><cell>46</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Ammanemes, slain by his eunuchs</cell><cell>38</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Sesôstris</cell><cell>48</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Lakhares (Lamaris or Lambares, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), the builder of the Labyrinth</cell>
<cell>8</cell></row>
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
<row><cell>5. Ammeres (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>8</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Ammenemes (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>8</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Skemiophris his sister (unnamed by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>4</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>160</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>245)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xiii.</hi>&mdash;Thebans: 60 kings for 453 years.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xiv.</hi>&mdash;Xoites: 76 kings for 134 years.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 484 years).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xv.</hi>&mdash;Shepherds: 6 Phœnician strangers
at Memphis for 284 years. (<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> Thebans for 250 years).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Saites</cell><cell>19</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Bnôn</cell><cell>44</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Pakhnan</cell><cell>61</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Staan</cell><cell>50</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Arkles</cell><cell>49</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Aphôbis</cell><cell>61</cell></row>
<row><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>284</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xvi.</hi>&mdash;Shepherds: 32 kings for 582 years.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 5 Thebans for 190 years).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xvii.</hi>&mdash;Shepherds: 43 kings for 151 years and
43 Thebans for 151 years.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> Shepherds, Phœnician strangers for 103 years:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Saites</cell><cell>19</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Bnôn</cell><cell>40</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Arkles (Arm. Version)</cell><cell>30</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Aphôphis (Arm. Version)</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>103</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xviii.</hi>&mdash;Thebans: 16 kings.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 14 kings.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Amôs[is]</cell><cell>25</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Khebrôs (Khebrôn, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Amenôphthis (Amenôphis for 21 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Amensis or Amersis (omitted by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>22</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Misaphris (Miphris for 12 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Misphragmouthôsis</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Touthmôsis</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Amenôphis Memnôn</cell><cell>31</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Horos (Oros, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>37</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Akherres (Akhenkheres or Akhenkherses for
16 or 12 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>32</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Rathôs (omitted by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Khebrés (Akherres for 8 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>12</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Akherres (Kherres for 15 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>12</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. Armeses (Armais Danaos, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>5</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Ramesses (Ramesses Ægyptos for 68 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>1</cell></row>
<row><cell>16. Amenôphath (Amenôphis for 40 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>19</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>263</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>348</cell></row>
<row><cell>Really</cell><cell>287)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xix.</hi>&mdash;Thebans: 7 kings. (<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 5 kings.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Sethôs (for 55 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>51</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Rapsakes (Rampses for 66 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>61</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Ammenephthes (for 8 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>20</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Ramesses (omitted by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>60</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Ammenemmes (for 26 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>5</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Thouôris or Polybos</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>209</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>194</cell></row>
<row><cell>Really</cell><cell>204)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xx.</hi>&mdash;Thebans: 12 kings for 135 years.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 172 or 178 years.)
</p>

<p>
Among the 12 kings were:&mdash;
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>Nekhepsôs</cell><cell>19</cell></row>
<row><cell>Psammouthis</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kêrtos</cell><cell>16 (<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 12)</cell></row>
<row><cell>Rampsis</cell><cell>45</cell></row>
<row><cell>Amenses or Ammenemes</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell>Okhyras</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>137</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxi.</hi>&mdash;Tanites: 7 kings.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Smendes</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Psousennes (for 41 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>46</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Nephelkheres (Nepherkheres, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>4</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Amenôphthis</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Osokhôr</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Psinakhes</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Psousennes (for 35 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>130</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>130</cell></row>
<row><cell>Really</cell><cell>114)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxii.</hi>&mdash;Bubastites: 9 kings. (<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 3 kings.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Sesonkhis (Sesonkhôsis, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>21</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Osorthôn</cell><cell>15</cell></row>
<row><cell>3, 4, 5. Unnamed (omitted by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>25</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Takelôthis</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>7, 8, 9. Unnamed (omitted by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>42</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>120</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>44</cell></row>
<row><cell>Really</cell><cell>116)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxiii.</hi>&mdash;Tanites; 4 kings.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 3 kings.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Petoubates (Petoubastes for 25 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>40</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Osorkhô Hêraklês (Osorthôn for 9 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>8</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Psammous</cell><cell>10</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Zêt (omitted by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>31</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>89</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>44)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxiv.</hi>&mdash;One Saite.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Bokkhôris the legislator (for 44 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxv.</hi>&mdash;Ethiopians: 3 kings.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Sabakôn (for 12 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>8</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Sebikhôs his son (for 12 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Tearkos (Tarakos for 20 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>18</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>40</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>44)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxvi.</hi>&mdash;Saites: 9 kings.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 1, Ammeris the Ethiopian for 18 or 12 years.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Stephinates (Stephinathis, the 2nd king, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Nekhepsôs (the 3rd king, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Nekhaô (for 6 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>8</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Psammêtikhos (for 44 or 45 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>54</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Nekhaô II.</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Psammouthis II. (or Psammitikhos, for 17 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)  6</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Ouaphris, (for 25 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>19</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Amôsis (for 42 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>44</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Psammekherites (omitted by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>1/2</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;-</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>150-1/2</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>167)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxvii.</hi>&mdash;Persians: 8 kings.
</p>

<p>
(Each king is followed by the number of years and months reigned.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Kambyses, in the 5th year of his reign (for 3 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>6 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Dareios, son of Hystaspes</cell><cell>36 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Xerxes I.</cell><cell>21 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Artabanos (omitted by <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>0 7</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Artaxerxes</cell><cell>41 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Xerxes II.</cell><cell>0 2</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Sogdianos</cell><cell>0 7</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Dareios, son of Xerxes</cell><cell>19 0</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>124 4</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>120 4)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxviii.</hi>&mdash;One Saite.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Amyrtaios</cell><cell>6 0</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxix.</hi>&mdash;Mendesians: 4 kings.
(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> 5 kings.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Nepherites I. or Nekherites</cell><cell>6 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Akhôris</cell><cell>13 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Psammouthes</cell><cell>1 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> inserts Mouthis here, 1 year.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Nepherites II.</cell><cell>0 4</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>20 4</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>21 4)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxx.</hi>&mdash;Sebennytes: 3 kings.
</p>

<p>
(Each king is followed by the number of years reigned.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Nektanebes I. (for 10 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>18</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Teôs</cell><cell>2</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Nektanebes II. (for 8 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>18</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>38</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>20)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxxi.</hi>&mdash;Persians: 3 kings.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Okhos, in his 20th year (for 6 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>2</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Arses (for 4 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>3</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Dareios (for 6 years, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>)</cell><cell>4</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sum</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi></cell><cell>16)</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Dynasties Of Manetho
According To Josephus.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xv.</hi>&mdash;Hyksôs or Shepherds.
</p>

<p>
After the overthrow of Timaios, the last king of the fourteenth
dynasty, a period of anarchy.
</p>

<p>
(Each king is followed by the number of years and months reigned.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Salatis at Memphis</cell><cell>13 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Beon</cell><cell>44 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Apakhnas</cell><cell>36 7</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Apôphis</cell><cell>61 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Yanias or Annas</cell><cell>50 1</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Assis</cell><cell>49 2</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasties xviii.</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>xix.</hi>&mdash;Thebans.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Tethmôsis</cell><cell>25 4</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Khebrôn his son</cell><cell>13 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell><cell>20 7</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Amesses his sister</cell><cell>21 9</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Mephres</cell><cell>12 9</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Mephramouthôsis</cell><cell>25 10</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Thmôsis</cell><cell>9 8</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell><cell>30 10</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Oros</cell><cell>36 5</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Akenkhres his daughter</cell><cell>12 1</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Rathôtis her brother</cell><cell>9 0</cell></row>
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
<row><cell>12. Akenkheres <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell><cell>12 5</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Akenkheres <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell><cell>12 3</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. Armais</cell><cell>4 1</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Ramesses</cell><cell>1 4</cell></row>
<row><cell>16. Armesses Miamoun</cell><cell>60 2</cell></row>
<row><cell>17. Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi></cell><cell>19 6</cell></row>
<row><cell>18. Sethôsis Ægyptos and Ramesses (or Hermeus)
Danaos</cell><cell>59 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>19. Rhampses his son</cell><cell>66 0</cell></row>
<row><cell>20. Amenôphis his son</cell><cell>?</cell></row>
<row><cell>21. Sethôs Ramesses his son</cell><cell>?</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
[The order ought to be: 15, 18, 19 (identical with 16),
20 (identical with 17).]
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Theban Kings Of Egypt
According To Eratosthenes.</head>

<p>
(Each king is followed by the number of years reigned.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.8cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(60) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>1. Mênes, a Thênite of Thebes, interpreted <q>of Amon</q></cell><cell>62</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Athôthes, son of Mênes, interpreted <q>born of Thoth</q></cell><cell>59</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Athôthes <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell><cell>32</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Diabiês his son, interpreted <q>loving his comrades</q></cell><cell>19</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Pemphôs his brother, interpreted <q>son of Hêraklês</q> (Semempsis)</cell><cell>18</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Toigar the invincible Momkheiri, a Memphite,
interpreted <q>with superfluous limbs</q> (Tosorthros)</cell><cell>79</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Stoikhos his son, interpreted <q>insensate Arês</q> [? Set]</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Gosormies (perhaps Tosertasis)</cell><cell>30</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Mares his son, interpreted <q>Sun-given</q></cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Anôyphis his son, interpreted <q>promiscuous</q> or
<q>festive</q></cell><cell>20</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Sirios, interpreted <q>son of side-locks</q> or <q>unenvied</q></cell><cell>18</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Khnoubos Gneuros, interpreted <q>the golden son
of the golden</q></cell><cell>22</cell></row>
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
<row><cell>13. Rauôsis, interpreted <q>chief ruler</q> (Ratoises)</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. Biyres (Bikheres)</cell><cell>10</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Saôphis, interpreted <q>long-haired</q> or <q>tradesman</q>
(Kheops)</cell><cell>29</cell></row>
<row><cell>16. Saôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> (Khephren)</cell><cell>27</cell></row>
<row><cell>17. Moskheres, interpreted <q>given to the Sun</q>
(Mykerinos)</cell><cell>31</cell></row>
<row><cell>18. Mousthis</cell><cell>33</cell></row>
<row><cell>19. Pammes Arkhondes (Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>)</cell><cell>35</cell></row>
<row><cell>20. Pappos the Great (Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>)</cell><cell>100</cell></row>
<row><cell>21. Ekheso-Sokaras (Sokar-m-saf)</cell><cell>1</cell></row>
<row><cell>22. Nitôkris, a queen, interpreted <q>Nit the victorious</q></cell><cell>6</cell></row>
<row><cell>23. Myrtaios the given to Amon</cell><cell>22</cell></row>
<row><cell>24. Thyosi-mares, interpreted <q>the strong Sun</q></cell><cell>12</cell></row>
<row><cell>25. Thirillos or Thinillos, interpreted <q>who has increased
his father's strength</q> (Nefer-ka-Ra Terel)</cell><cell>8</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Semphroukrates, interpreted <q>Hêraklês Harpokrates</q></cell><cell>18</cell></row>
<row><cell>27. Khouthêr Tauros the tyrant (perhaps Akhthoês)</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell>28. Meures</cell><cell>12</cell></row>
<row><cell>29. Khômaephtha, interpreted <q>a world loving Ptah</q></cell><cell>11</cell></row>
<row><cell>30. Soikouniosokhos the tyrant</cell><cell>60</cell></row>
<row><cell>31. Pente-athyris</cell><cell>16</cell></row>
<row><cell>32. Stammenes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> (Amen-m-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>)</cell><cell>23</cell></row>
<row><cell>33. Sistosi-khermes, interpreted <q>Heraklês the strong</q>
(Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>)</cell><cell>55</cell></row>
<row><cell>34. Maris (Amen-m-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>)</cell><cell>43</cell></row>
<row><cell>35. Siphyas (Siphthas), interpreted <q>Thoth the son of
Ptah</q> (Si-Ptah)</cell><cell>5</cell></row>
<row><cell>36. Name lost</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell>37. Phrourôn or Neilos (Sebek-neferu-Ra)</cell><cell>5</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Amouthantaios</cell><cell>63</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>

<div>
<head>The Egyptian Kings
According To The Monuments.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty i.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{0.5cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Abydos.</cell><cell>Saqqârah.</cell><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Meni</cell><cell></cell><cell>Meni</cell><cell>Menes</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Teta</cell><cell></cell><cell>Atut</cell><cell>Athothis</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Atota</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Kenkenes</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Ata</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Ouenephes <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Husapti</cell><cell></cell><cell>Husapti</cell><cell>Ousaphaidos</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Mer-ba-pa</cell><cell>Mer-ba-pen</cell><cell>Mer-ba-pen, 73 yrs.  Miebidos</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Samsu</cell><cell></cell><cell>Samsu, 72 yrs.</cell><cell>Semempses</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Qabh(u)</cell><cell>Qabhu</cell><cell>Qabhu, 83 yrs.</cell><cell>Bienekhes.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty ii.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{0.5cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Abydos.</cell><cell>Saqqârah.</cell><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Buzau</cell><cell>Bai-nuter</cell><cell>(Buzau), 95 yrs.</cell><cell>Boêthos</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Kakau</cell><cell>Kakau</cell><cell>Kakau</cell><cell>Kaiekhos</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Ba-nuter-en</cell><cell>Ba-nuter-en</cell><cell>Ba-nuter-en, 95 yrs.</cell><cell>Binothris</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Uznas</cell><cell>Uznas</cell><cell>(Uznas), 70 yrs.</cell><cell>Tlas</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Senda<note place='foot'>The inscription of Sheri, the prophet of Send, part of which is in the
Ashmolean Museum at Oxford and part at Cairo, makes Per-ab-sen the
successor of Send. He will have corresponded to the Khaires of Manetho.</note></cell><cell>Send</cell><cell>Senda, 74 (?) yrs.</cell><cell>Sethenes</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Nefer-ka-Ra</cell><cell>(Nefer-ka-Ra), 70 yrs.</cell><cell>Nepherkheres.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty iii.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{0.5cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Abydos.</cell><cell>Saqqârah.</cell><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Nefer-ka-Sokar</cell><cell>Nefer-ka-Sokar (? 2) 8 yrs. 4 mths. 2 dys.</cell><cell>Nekherophes</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Zefa</cell><cell>Hu-Zefa, 25(?) yrs. 8 mths. 4 dys.</cell><cell>Tosorthros</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Babai</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Zazai</cell><cell></cell><cell>Zazai, 37 yrs. 2 mths. 1 day.</cell><cell>Tyreis</cell></row>
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Neb-ka</cell><cell></cell><cell>Neb-ka-(Ra), 19 yrs.</cell><cell>Mesokhris</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Zoser-Sa</cell><cell>Zoser</cell><cell>Zoser, 19 yrs. 2 mths.</cell><cell>Sôyphis</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Teta <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell><cell>Zoser-teta</cell><cell>Zoser-teta, 6 yrs.</cell><cell>Tosertasis</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Sezes</cell><cell>Neb-ka-Ra</cell><cell></cell><cell>Akhes</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Nefer-ka-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>(Nefer-ka-Ra), 6 yrs.</cell><cell>Sephouris</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Huni</cell><cell>Huni, 24 yrs.</cell><cell>Kerpheres.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty iv.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{0.5cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Abydos.</cell><cell>Saqqârah.</cell><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Snefru</cell><cell>Snefru</cell><cell>Snefru, 24 yrs.</cell><cell>Soris</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Khufu</cell><cell>Khufuf</cell><cell>(Khufu), 23 yrs.</cell><cell>Souphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Ra-dad-f</cell><cell>Ra-dad-f</cell><cell>(Ra-dad-f), 8 yrs.</cell><cell>Ratoises</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Khâ-f-Ra</cell><cell>Khâ-f-Ra</cell><cell></cell><cell>Souphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Men-kau-Ra</cell><cell></cell><cell>[Men]-kau-[Ra]</cell><cell>Menkheres</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Shepseskaf</cell><cell></cell><cell>Shepseskaf</cell><cell>Seberkheres (?)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty v.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{0.5cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Abydos.</cell><cell>Saqqârah.</cell><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>User-ka-f</cell><cell>User-ka-f</cell><cell>(Userkaf), 28 yrs.</cell><cell>Ouserkheres</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Sahu-Ra</cell><cell>Sahu-Ra</cell><cell>(Sahu-Ra), 4 yrs.</cell><cell>Sephres</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Kaka</cell><cell></cell><cell>(Kaka), 2 yrs.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Nefer-Ra</cell><cell>Nefer-ar-ka-Ra<note place='foot'>In an inscription now at Palermo a King Ahtes is mentioned by the
side of Nefer-ar-ka-Ra.</note></cell><cell>(Nefer-ar-ka-Ra), 7 yrs.</cell><cell>Nepherkheres</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Shepses-ka-Ra</cell><cell>(Shepses-ka-Ra), 12 yrs.</cell><cell>Sisires</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Khâ-nefer-Ra</cell><cell></cell><cell>Kheres</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Akau-Hor, 7 yrs.<note place='foot'>In the tomb of Mera, discovered by Mr. de Morgan at Saqqârah in 1894,
Akau-Hor stands between Unas and Teta.</note></cell><cell>Rathoures</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Ra-n-user (An)</cell><cell></cell><cell>(Ra-n-user-An), 25 yrs.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Men-kau-Hor</cell><cell>Men-ka-Hor</cell><cell>Men-ka-Hor, 8 yrs.</cell><cell>Menkheres</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell>Dad-ka-Ra (Assa)</cell><cell>Mâ-ka-Ra</cell><cell>Dad(-ka Ra Assa), 28 yrs.</cell><cell>Tankheres</cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell>Unas</cell><cell>Unas</cell><cell>Unas, 30 yrs.</cell><cell>Obnos.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty vi.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{0.5cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13) lw(13)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Abydos.</cell><cell>Saqqârah.</cell><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Teta <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi></cell><cell>Teta</cell><cell></cell><cell>Othoes</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>User-ka-Ra</cell><cell></cell><cell>(Ati?)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Meri-Ra (Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>)</cell><cell>Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell><cell>(Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>), 20 yrs.</cell><cell>Phios</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Mer-n-Ra Miht-m-saf <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell><cell>Mer-n-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell><cell>(Miht-m-saf <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>), 14 yrs.</cell><cell>Methousouphis</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Nefer-ka-Ra (Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>)</cell><cell>Nefer-ka-Ra</cell><cell>(Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> ), 9 (4) yrs.</cell><cell>Phiops</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Mer-n-Ra Miht-m-saf <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>(Miht-m-saf <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>), 1 yr. 1 mth.</cell><cell>Menthesouphis</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Neit-aker, a queen</cell><cell>Nitokris.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasties vii. and viii.</hi><note place='foot'>One of the kings of the seventh dynasty was Dad-nefer-Ra Dudu-mes,
whose name is conjoined with those of the sixth dynasty kings
at El-Kab, and who built at Gebelên.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(26) lw(26)'">
<row><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell><cell>Abydos.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Nefer-ka, 2 yrs. 1 mth. 1 dy.</cell><cell>1. Nuter-ka-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Neferus, 4 yrs. 2 mth. 1 dy.</cell><cell>2. Men-ka-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Ab-n-Ra I., 2 yrs. 1 mth. 1 dy.</cell><cell>3. Nefer-ka-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>4. ... 1 yr. 8 dys.</cell><cell>4. Nefer-ka-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> Nebi</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Ab-n-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell><cell>5. Dad-ka-Ra Shema</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Hanti</cell><cell>6. Nefer-ka-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> Khondu</cell></row>
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
<row><cell>7. Pest-sat-n-Sopd</cell><cell>7. Mer-n-Hor</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Pait-kheps</cell><cell>8. Snefer-ka <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Serhlinib.<note place='foot'>The last five names are thus given by Lauth.</note></cell><cell>9. Ka-n-Ra.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10. Nefer-ka-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi> Terel</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11. Nefer-ka-Hor</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12. Nefer-ka-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> Pepi-Seneb</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13. Snefer-ka <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Annu</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14. [User-]kau-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15. Nefer-kau-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16. Nefer-kau-Hor</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17. Nefer-ar-ka-Ra.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty ix.</hi> Monuments.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(26) lw(26)'">
<row><cell>Khiti (or Khruti) <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Mer-ab-Ra (the Akhthoes of Manetho)</cell><cell>Âa-hotep-Ra
Skhâ-n-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Aah-mes(?)-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell>Mâa-ab-Ra</cell><cell>Se-n(?)-mu-Ra<note place='foot'>The names of these six kings are found only on scarabs, and are
placed here by Professor Petrie.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>Khâ-user-Ra</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty x.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(26) lw(26)'">
<row><cell>Monuments.</cell><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Mer-ka-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Nefer-hepu-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Nefer-ka-Ra</cell></row>
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
<row><cell>Ra-hotep-ab Amu-si-Hor-nez-hirtef</cell><cell>Khiti <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Se-heru-herri</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>[Ameni?]<note place='foot'>Ameni is mentioned in a papyrus along with Khiti.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Mer ...</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Meh ...</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Hu ...<note place='foot'>According to Lauth, the Turin papyrus gives nineteen kings to the
tenth dynasty, and 185 years.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xi.</hi><note place='foot'>According to Petrie's arrangement. Lieblein further includes in the
dynasty, Ra-snefer-ka, Ra ..., User-n-Ra, Neb-nem-Ra, and An-âa.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(26) lw(26)'">
<row><cell>Karnak.</cell><cell>Other Monuments.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Antef <hi rend='smallcaps'>I.</hi>, Prince (of Thebes)</cell><cell>Seshes-Hor-ap-mâa-Ra Antuf-Aa</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Men[tu-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>] the Pharaoh</cell><cell>Neb-hotep Mentu-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Antef <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell><cell>Uah-ânkh [Ter?]-seshes ap-mâa-Ra
Antef-Aa, his son</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Antef <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi></cell><cell>Seshes-herher-mâa-Ra Antef, his
brother</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Nuter-nefer Neb-taui-Ra Mentu-hotep
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Antef <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi></cell><cell>Nub-kheper-Ra Antauf (more than
50 yrs.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Neb-[khru]-Ra</cell><cell>Neb-khru-Ra Mentu-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> (more
than 46 yrs.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Queen Aah</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Antef <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> her son</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. S-ânkh-ka-Ra</cell><cell>S-ânkh-ka-Ra<note place='foot'>According to Lieblein the Turin papyrus makes the sum of the
eleventh dynasty 243 years, Neb-khru-Ra reigning 51 years.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xii.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Monuments.</cell><cell>Turin Papyrus.</cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Amen-m-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> S-hotep-ab-Ra alone, 20 yrs. With Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, 10 yrs.</cell><cell>S-hotep-ab-Ra, 19 yrs.</cell><cell>Ammenemes</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Usertesen<hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Kheper-ka-Ra alone, 32 yrs. With Amen-m-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>,
3 yrs.</cell><cell>... 45 yrs. 7 mths.</cell><cell>Sesonkhosis</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Amen-m-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Nub-kau-Ra alone, 29 yrs. With Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, 6
yrs.</cell><cell>... 3[2] yrs.</cell><cell>Ammanemes</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Khâ-kheper-Ra</cell><cell>... 19 yrs.</cell><cell>Sesostris</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Khâ-kau-Ra (more than 26 yrs.)</cell><cell>... 3[8] yrs.</cell><cell>Lakhares</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Amen-m-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Mâat-n-Ra, 43 yrs.</cell><cell>... 4[3] yrs.</cell><cell>Ammeres</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Amen-m-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> Mâ-khru-Ra</cell><cell>Mâ-khru-[Ra], 9 yrs. 3 mths. 27 dys.</cell><cell>Ammenemes</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Sebek-nefru-Ra (a queen)</cell><cell>Sebek-nefru-Ra, 3 yrs. 10 mths. 24 dys.</cell><cell>Skemiophris</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Sum of years of
twelfth dynasty:
213 years 1 mth.
17 days.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasties xiii.</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi>
Turin Papyrus.<note place='foot'>According to Brugsch.</note>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. Sebek-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> [Sekhem]-khu-taui-Ra (son of Sebek-nefru-Ra),
1 yr. 3 mths. 24 dys.</l>
<l>2. Sekhem-ka-Ra, 6 yrs.</l>
<l>3. Ra Amen-m-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi></l>
<l>4. S-hotep-ab-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></l>
<l>5. Aufni, 2 yrs.</l>
<l>6. S-ânkh-ab-Ra [Ameni Antuf Amen-m-hat], 1 yr.</l>
<l>7. S-men-ka-Ra</l>
<l>8. S-hotep-ab-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi></l>
<l>9. S-ânkh-ka-Ra</l>
<l>10, 11. Destroyed</l>
<l>12. Nezem-ab-Ra</l>
<l>13. Ra-Sebek-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></l>
<l>14. Ran-seneb</l>
<l>15. Autu-ab-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> (Hor)<note place='foot'>His name has been found by Mr. de Morgan at Dahshûr.</note></l>
<l>16. Sezef-[ka]-Ra</l>
<l>17. Sekhem-khu-taui-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Sebek-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi></l>
<l>18. User-n-Ra</l>
<l>19. S-menkh-ka-Ra Mer-menfiu</l>
<l>20. ... ka-Ra</l>
<l>21. S-user-set-Ra</l>
<l>22. Sekhem-uaz-taui-Ra Sebek-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi></l>
<l>23. Khâ-seshesh-Ra Nefer-hotep, son of Ha-ânkh-f</l>
<l>24. Si-Hathor-Ra</l>
<l>25. Khâ-nefer-Ra Sebek-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi></l>
<l>26. [Khâ-ka-Ra]</l>
<l>27. [Khâ-ânkh-Ra Sebek-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>]</l>
<l>28. Khâ-hotep-Ra Sebek-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi>, 4 yrs. 8 mths. 29 dys.</l>
<l>29. Uab-Ra Aa-ab, 10 yrs. 8 mths. 29 dys.</l>
<l>30. Mer-nefer-Ra Ai, 23 yrs.<note place='foot'>According to Maspero, thirteen years.</note> 8 mths. 18 dys.</l>
<l>31. Mer-hotep-Ra Ana, 2 yrs. 2 mths. 9 dys.</l>
<l>32. S-ânkh-n-s-uaztu-Ra, 3 yrs. 2 mths.</l>
<l>33. Mer-sekhem-Ra Anran,<note place='foot'>Maspero: Andû.</note> 3 yrs. 1 mth.</l>
<l>34. S-uaz-ka-Ra Ur, 5 yrs. ... mth. 8 dys.</l>
<l>35. Anemen ... Ra</l>
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
<l>36-46. Destroyed</l>
<l>47. Mer-kheper-Ra</l>
<l>48. Mer-kau-Ra Sebek-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi></l>
<l>49-53. Destroyed</l>
<l>54. ... mes-Ra</l>
<l>55. ... mât-Ra Aba</l>
<l>56. Nefer-uben-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></l>
<l>57. ... ka-Ra</l>
<l>58. S-uaz-n-Ra.</l>
<l>59-60. Destroyed</l>
<l>61. Nehasi-Ra<note place='foot'>Monuments of Nehasi, <q>the negro,</q> have been found at Tel
Mokdam and San.</note></l>
<l>62. Khâ-khru-Ra</l>
<l>63. Neb-f-autu-Ra, 2 yrs. 5 mths. 15 dys.</l>
<l>64. S-heb-Ra, 3 yrs.</l>
<l>65. Mer-zefa-Ra, 3 yrs.</l>
<l>66. S-uaz-ka-Ra, 1 yr.</l>
<l>67. Neb-zefa-Ra, 1 yr.</l>
<l>68. Uben-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></l>
<l>69-70. Destroyed</l>
<l>71. [Neb-]zefa-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, 4 yrs.</l>
<l>72. [Nefer-]Uben-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></l>
<l>73. Autu-ab-Ra <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></l>
<l>74. Her-ab-Ra</l>
<l>75. Neb-sen-Ra</l>
<l>76-79. Destroyed</l>
<l>80. S-kheper-n-Ra</l>
<l>81. Dad-khru-Ra</l>
<l>82. S-ânkh-ka-Ra</l>
<l>83. Nefer-tum-Ra</l>
<l>84. Sekhem ... Ra</l>
<l>85. Ka ... Ra</l>
<l>86. Nefer-ab-Ra</l>
<l>87. A ... ka-Ra</l>
<l>88. Khâ ... Ra, 2 yrs.</l>
<l>89. Nez-ka ... Ra</l>
<l>90. S-men ... Ra</l>
<l>91-111. Destroyed.</l>
<l>112. Sekhem ... Ra</l>
<l>113. Sekhem ... Ra</l>
<l>114. Sekhem-us ... Ra</l>
<l>115. Sesen ... Ra</l>
<l>116. Neb-ati-uzu-Ra</l>
<l>117. Neb-aten-uzu-Ra</l>
<l>118. S-men-ka-Ra</l>
<l>119. S-user-[aten]-Ra</l>
<l>120. Khâ-sekhem-[hent]-Ra</l>
<l>Some 37 more names are illegible.</l>
</lg>

<p>
[<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasties xiii.</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi>
Karnak.
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. ... ka.</l>
<l>2. S-uaz-n-Ra (Nefer-ka-Ra)</l>
<l>3. S-ankh-ab-Ra (T. P. 6)</l>
<l>4. Sekhem-khu-taui-Ra (T. P. 17)</l>
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
<l>5. Sekhem-s-uaz-taui-Ra. (T. P. 22)</l>
<l>6. Khâ-seshesh-Ra (T. P. 23)</l>
<l>7. Khâ-nefer-Ra (T. P. 25)</l>
<l>8. Khâ-ka-Ra (T. P. 26)</l>
<l>9. Khâ-ânkh-Ra (T. P. 27)</l>
<l>10. Kha-hotep-Ra</l>
<l>11. S-nefer-Ra</l>
<l>12. ... Ra</l>
<l>13. Ses-user-taui-Ra</l>
<l>14. Mer-sekhem-Ra</l>
<l>15. Sekhem-uaz-khâu-Ra (Sebek-m-saf <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>)</l>
<l>16. S-uah-n-Ra</l>
<l>17. [Sekhem]-uah-khâu-Ra (Sebek-m-saf <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>)</l>
<l>18. Za ... Ra</l>
<l>19. S-uaz-n-Ra</l>
<l>20. S-nefer ... Ra</l>
<l>21. ... Ra.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Other Monuments.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Men-khâu-Ra An-ab</l>
<l>Sekhem-ap-taui-Ra</l>
<l>Nefer-kheper-ka-Ra</l>
<l>Mut-r-ka-n-Ra</l>
<l>Ta-neb-n-Ra</l>
<l>Sekhem-nefer-khâu-Ra Apheru-m-saf</l>
<l>Mâa-nt-n-Ra Ter-n-Ra</l>
<l>Senb-in-mâ</l>
<l>Uazd</l>
<l>Khâ-nefrui</l>
<l>Men-nefer-Ra (Menophres)</l>
<l>Sekhem-sheddi-taui-Ra Sebek-m-saf <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></l>
<l>Ra-seshes-men-taui Tehuti].</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasties xv.</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>xvi.</hi>
Turin Papyrus.
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. Abehnas ... (?)</l>
<l>2. Apepi</l>
<l>3. A ...</l>
</lg>

<p>
Other Monuments.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Shalati (?)</l>
<l>Banân (?)</l>
<l>Ya'qob-hal (<q>Jacob-el</q>)</l>
<l>Khian S-user-(Set-)n-Ra</l>
<l>Apepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Aa-user-Ra (reigned more than 33 years)</l>
<l>Apepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Aa-ab-taui-Ra.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xvii.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Skenen-Ra Taa <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> (contemporary with Apepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>)</l>
<l>Skenen-Ra Taa <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Aa</l>
<l>Skenen-Ra Taa <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Ken</l>
<l>Uaz-kheper-Ra Ka-mes, and wife Aah-hotep.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Other kings of the seventeenth dynasty were:&mdash;
</p>

<lg>
<l>Si-pa-ar-Ahmes</l>
<l>Aah-hotep</l>
<l>S-khent-neb-Ra</l>
<l>Amen-sa</l>
<l>Kheper-ka-n-Ra</l>
<l>S-nekht-n-Ra.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xviii.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Neb-pehuti-Ra Aahmes (more than 20 yrs.), and wife Nefert-ari-Aahmes<note place='foot'>In the eighteenth year of Aahmes, Queen Amen-sit is associated
with him on a stêlê found at Thebes.</note></cell><cell>Amosis</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Ser-ka-Ra Amen-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, his son (20 yrs. 7 mths.); his mother at first regent</cell><cell>Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Aa-kheper-ka-Ra Tehuti-mes <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, his son, and wife Aahmes Meri-Amen, and Queen
Amen-sit.</cell><cell>Chebron (?)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Aa-kheper-n-Ra Tehuti-mes <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, his
son (more than 9 yrs.), and wife (sister)
Hashepsu <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Mâ-ka-Ra</cell><cell>Amensis</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Khnum Amen Hashepsu <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Mâ-ka-Ra,
his sister (more than 16 yrs.)</cell><cell>Amensis (?)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Ra-men-kheper Tehuti-mes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, her
brother, (57 yrs. 11 mths. 1 dy., <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1503,
March 20-1449, Feb. 14<note place='foot'>According to Dr. Mahler's astronomical determination. Thothmes
counted sixteen years of his sister's reign as part of his own. Hashepsu
was only his half-sister, his mother being Ast, who was probably not
of royal blood. The mother of Hashepsu was Hashepsu <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></note>)</cell><cell>Misaphris</cell></row>
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
<row><cell>7. Aa-khepru-Ra Amen-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, his son
(more then 5 yrs.)</cell><cell>Misphragmu-thosis</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Men-khepru-Ra Tehuti-mes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, his
son (more than 7 yrs.)</cell><cell>Touthmosis</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Neb-mâ-Ra Amen-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, his son,
(more then 35 yrs.), and wife Teie</cell><cell>Amenôphis II.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Nefer-khepru-Ra Amen-hotep  <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>
Khu-n-aten<note place='foot'>Called Khuri[ya] in one of the Tel el-Amarna tables. Hence the
Horos of Manetho.</note>, his son (more than
17 yrs), and wife Nefrui-Thi S-âa-ka-khepru-Ra</cell><cell>Horos</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Ankh-khepru-Ra, and wife Meri-Aten</cell><cell>Akherres</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Tut-ânkh-Amen Khepru-neb-Ra, and wife Ankh-nes-Amen</cell><cell>Rathotis</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Aten-Ra-nefer-nefru-mer-Aten</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. Ai Kheper-khepru-ar-mâ-Ra and wife
Thi more than 4 yrs.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Hor-m-hib Mi-Amen Ser-khepru-Ka                  
(more than 3 yrs.)</cell><cell>Armais</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xix.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Men-pehuti-Ra Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> (more than 2 yrs.)</cell><cell>Ramesses</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Men-mâ-Ra Seti I. Mer-n-Ptah <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> (more than
27 yrs.), and wife Tua</cell><cell>Sethos</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. User-mâ-Ra (Osymandyas) Sotep-n-Ra Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>
Mi-Amen (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1348-1281)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Mer-n-Ptah <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Hotep-hi-ma Ba-n-Ra Mi-Amen</cell><cell>Ammenephthes</cell></row>
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
<row><cell>5. User-khepru-Ra Seti II.  Mer-n-Ptah <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi></cell><cell>Sethos Ramesses</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Amen-mesu Hik-An Mer-kha-Ra Sotep-n-Ra</cell><cell>Amenemes</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Khu-n-Ra Sotep-n-Ra Mer-n-Ptah <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>
Si-Ptah (more than 6 yrs.), and wife Ta-user</cell><cell>Thouoris</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xx.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. Set-nekt Merer Mi Amon (recovered
the kingdom from the Phœnician Arisu)</l>
<l>2. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Hik-An (more than 32 yrs.)</l>
<l>3. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> Hik-Mâ Mi-Amen
(more than 11 yrs.)</l>
<l>4. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> User-mâ-s-kheper-n-Ra
Mi-Amen (more than 4 yrs.)</l>
<l>5. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi> Neb-mâ-Ra Mi-Amen
Amen-hir-khopesh-f (Ramessu Meri-Tum
in northern Egypt)</l>
<l>6. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> At-Amen User-mâ-Ra
Mi-Amen</l>
<l>7. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> Set-hir-khopesh-f Mi-Amen
User-mâ-Ra Khu-n-Amen</l>
<l>8. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> Si-Ptah S-khâ-n-Ra Mi-Amen
(19 yrs.)</l>
<l>9. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> Nefer-ka-Ra Mi-Amen
Sotep-n-Ra (more than 10 yrs.)</l>
<l>10. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>xi.</hi> Amen-hir-khopesh-f
Kheper-mâ Ra Sotep-n-Ra</l>
<l>11. Ramessu <hi rend='smallcaps'>xii.</hi> Men-mâ-Ra Mi-Amen
Sotep-n-Ptah Khâ-m-uas (more
than 27 yrs.)</l>
</lg>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxi. Illegitimate.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. Hir-Hor Si-Amen, High-priest of Amon at Thebes, and
wife Nezem-mut</l>
<l>2. Piankhi, High-priest, and wife Tent-Amen</l>
<l>3. Pinezem <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, High-priest, and wife Hont-taui</l>
<l>4. Pinezem <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, King, and wife Mâ-ka-Ra</l>
<l>5. Men-kheper-Ra, High-priest, and wife Isis-m-kheb</l>
<l>6. Pinezem <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, High-priest.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxi. Legitimate.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Nes-Bindidi Mi-Amen</cell><cell>Smendes</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. P-seb-khâ-n <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Mi-Amen
Aa-kheper-Ra Sotep-n-Amen</cell><cell>Psousennes <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>3. [Nefer-ka-Ra]</cell><cell>Nephelkheres</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Amen-m-apt</cell><cell>Amenophthis</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Osokhor</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Pinezem (?)</cell><cell>Psinakhes</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Hor P-seb-khâ-n <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell><cell>Psousennes <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxii.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Shashanq <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Mi-Amen Hez-kheper-Ra
Sotep-n-Ra, son of Nemart (more than
21 yrs.), and wife Ka-râ-mât</cell><cell>Sesonkhis</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Usarkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Mi-Amen Sekhem-kheper-Ra
(married Mâ-ka-Ra, daughter of
P-seb-khâ-n <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>)</cell><cell>Osorkon</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Takelet <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Mi-Amen Si-Isis User-mâ-Ra
Sotep-n-Amen (more than 23 yrs.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Usarkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Mi-Amen Si-Bast
User-mâ-Ra (more than 23 yrs.)</cell></row>
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
<row><cell>5. Shashanq <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Mi-Amen Sekhem-kheper-Ra</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Takelet <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Mi-Amen Si-Isis Hez-kheper-Ra
(more then 15 yrs.)</cell><cell>Takelothis</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Shashanq <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Mi-Amen Si-Bast
User-mâ-Ra (52 yrs.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Pimai Mi-Amen User-mâ-Ra Sotep-n-Amen</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Shashanq <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> Aa-kheper-Ra (more
than 37 yrs.)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxiii.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. S-her-ab-Ra Petu-si-Bast</cell><cell>Petoubastes</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Usarkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Mi-Amen Aa-kheper-Ra
Sotep-n-Amen</cell><cell>Osorkho</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. P-si-Mut User-Ra Sotep-n-Ptah</cell><cell>Psammos</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Zet.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Interregnum.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Egypt, divided between several princes, including Tef-nekht
(Tnephakhthos), father of Bak-n-ran-f. It is overrun
by Piankhi the Ethiopian, while Usarkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> reigns at
Bubastis. The son and successor of Piankhi is Mi-Amen-Nut.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxiv.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Bak-n-ran-f Uah-ka-Ra (more than
16 yrs.)<note place='foot'>There is a contract in the Louvre drawn up at Thebes in the
sixteenth year of his reign.</note></cell><cell>Bokkhoris</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxv.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Shabaka Nefer-ka-Ra, son of Kashet (12 yrs.)</cell><cell>Sabako</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Shabataka Dad-ka-Ra</cell><cell>Sebikhos</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Taharka Nefer-tum-khu-Ra or Tirhakah (26 yrs.)</cell><cell>Tearkos</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Interregnum.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Assyrian conquest and division of Egypt into
twenty satrapies, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 672-660. Taharka and his successor
Urdamanu (Rud-Amen), or, as the name may also be
read, Tandamane (Tanuath-Amen), make vain attempts to
recover it. In Manetho the period is represented by
Stephinates (Sotep-n-Nit), Nekhepsos and Nekhao, the last
of whom is called in the Assyrian inscriptions Niku, the
father of Psammetikhos, and vassal-king of Memphis and
Sais.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxvi.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Psamtik <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Uah-ab-Ra and wife
Mehet-usekh (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 664-610)</cell><cell>Psammetikhos</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Nekau Nem-ab-Ra and wife Mi-Mut
Nit-aker (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 610-594)</cell><cell>Nekhao</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Psamtik <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> Nefer-ab-Ra, and wife
Nit-aker (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 594-589)</cell><cell>Psammouthis</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Uah-ab-Ra Haa-ab-Ra and wife
Aah-hotep (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 589-570)</cell><cell>Ouaphris</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Aah-mes Si-Nit Khnum-ab-Ra and
wife Thent-kheta (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 570-526)</cell><cell>Amosis</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Psamtik <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> Ankh-ka-n-Ra (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 526-525)</cell><cell>Psammekherites</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxvii.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Kambathet Sam-taui Mestu-Ra (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 525-519)</cell><cell>Kambyses</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Ntariush <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Settu-Ra (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 521-485)</cell><cell>Dareios <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Khabbash Senen Tanen Sotep-n-Ptah (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 485)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Khsherish (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 484)</cell><cell>Xerxes <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Artakhsharsha (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 465-425)</cell><cell>Artaxerxes</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ntariush Mi-Amen-Ra (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 424-405)</cell><cell>Dareios <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell></row>
</table>


<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxviii.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Amen-ar-t-rut<note place='foot'>According to Wiedemann.</note> (more than 6 yrs.), <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 415</cell><cell>Amyrtaios</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxix.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Nef-âa-rut <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> Ba-n-Ra Mi-nuteru (more than 4 yrs.)</cell><cell>Nepherites <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Hakori Khnum-mâ-Ra Sotep-n-Ptah (13 yrs.)</cell><cell>Akhoris</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. P-si-Mut User-Ptah-sotep-n-Ra (1 yr.)</cell><cell>Psammouthes</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Hor-neb-kha (1 yr.)</cell><cell>Mouthes</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Nef-âa-rut <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> (1 yr.)</cell><cell>Nepherites <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dynasty xxx.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5.3cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(48) lw(12)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Manetho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Nekht-Hor-hib Ra-snezem-ab Sotep-n-Anhur,
son of Nef-âa-rut <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> (9 yrs.)</cell><cell>Nektanebes <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Zihu (1 yr.)</cell><cell>Teôs</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Nekht-neb-f Kheper-ka-Ra (18 yrs.)</cell><cell>Nektanebes <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix II. Biblical Dates.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1348-1281. Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, the Pharaoh of the Oppression, and
builder of Pithom.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cir.</hi> 1200. Campaign of Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> in Judah and Moab.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cir.</hi> 960. Solomon marries the daughter of the Tanite
Pharaoh, and receives Gezer.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cir.</hi> 925. Shishak (Shashanq <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>) invades Palestine and
takes Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cir.</hi> 900. Invasion of Judah by Zerah (Osorkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
725. Hoshea of Israel makes alliance with So of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
720. Sargon defeats the <q>Pharaoh</q> and Sibe his general
at Raphia.
</p>

<p>
701. Defeat of Tirhakah by Sennacherib at Eltekeh.
</p>

<p>
674. Invasion of Egypt by Esar-haddon.
</p>

<p>
670. Tirhakah driven from the frontier to Memphis and thence
to Ethiopia.
</p>

<p>
668. Revolt of Egypt suppressed by Assur-bani-pal.
</p>

<p>
665. Destruction of Thebes (No-Amon) by the Assyrians.
</p>

<p>
609. Necho invades Asia; defeat and death of Josiah.
</p>

<p>
605. Necho defeated at Carchemish by Nebuchadrezzar;
loss of Asiatic possessions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cir.</hi> 585. The Jews fly to Egypt, carrying Jeremiah with them.
</p>

<p>
567. Egypt invaded by Nebuchadrezzar.
</p>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<p>
320. Palestine seized by Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>; many Jews
settled by him in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cir.</hi> 280. The Greek translation of the Old Testament
commenced.
</p>

<p>
167. Onias permitted by Ptolemy Philometor to build
the temple at Onion.
</p>

<p>
4. Flight of the Holy Family into Egypt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 70. Vespasian orders the prefect Lupus to close the
temple at Onion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix III. The Greek Writers Upon Egypt.</head>

<p>
(1) Hekataios of Miletos, tyrant, statesman, and writer,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 500-480. Sent as ambassador to the Persians after the
suppression of the Ionic revolt. Travelled in Egypt as far
as Thebes. His account of Egypt contained in his great
work on geography, now lost.
</p>

<p>
(2) Thales of Miletos, philosopher, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 500. Wrote on
the causes of the inundation of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
(3) Hellanikos of Mytilênê, historian, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 420. Wrote
an account of Egypt and a journey to the oasis of Ammon,
now lost.
</p>

<p>
(4) Herodotos of Halikarnassos, historian, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 445-430.
Travelled in Egypt as far as the Fayyûm. His account
of Egypt chiefly contained in the second book of his
histories.
</p>

<p>
(5) Demokritos of Abdera, philosopher, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 405. Spent
five years in Egypt, and wrote books on geography and on
the Ethiopic hieroglyphics, now lost.
</p>

<p>
(6) Aristagoras of Miletos, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 350. Wrote a history of
Egypt in at least two books, now lost.
</p>

<p>
(7) Eudoxos of Knidos, philosopher. Visited Egypt in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 358, and wrote an account of it in his work on geography,
now lost.
</p>

<p>
(8) Leo of Pella, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 330. Wrote a book on the
Egyptian gods, now lost.
</p>

<p>
(9) Hekataios of Abdera, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 300. Lived at the court
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
of Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, travelled up the Nile and examined the
Theban temples. Wrote a history of Egypt, the first book
of which was on Egyptian philosophy, now lost. The
account of the Ramesseum (the temple of Osymandyas
or Usir-mâ-Ra) given by Diodôros is derived from his
work.
</p>

<p>
(10) Manetho, Egyptian priest of Sebennytos, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 270.
Compiled the history of Egypt in Greek from the records
contained in the temples. Corrected many of the errors of
Herodotos, according to Josephus. The work was divided
into three parts, and Josephus quotes from it the account of
the Hyksos conquest, the list of the kings of the eighteenth
dynasty, and the Egyptian legend of the Israelitish Exodus.
An epitome of the history was probably added at the end of
the work. We know it from the list of dynasties quoted
by the Christian writers Julius Africanus (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 220) and
Eusebius, both of whom endeavoured to harmonise its
chronology with that of the Old Testament. The work of
Africanus is lost, but the list of dynasties has been preserved
by Georgios the Synkellos or Coadjutor of the
Patriarch of Constantinople (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 792), who has added two
other lists professedly from Manetho, but really from post-Christian
forgeries (<q>The Old Chronicle</q> and <q>The Book of
Sôthis</q>). Eusebius quotes from a copyist of Africanus, or
some unknown copyist of Manetho himself, and his list has
been preserved (like that of Africanus) by George the
Synkellos, as well as in an Armenian translation. Manetho
also wrote (in Greek) on Egyptian festivals and religion, but
all his works are lost.
</p>

<p>
(11) Eratosthenes of Kyrênê, geographer, chronologist,
astronomer and mathematician, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 275-194. Librarian of
the Alexandrine Museum under Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> First fixed
the latitude of places by measuring the length of the sun's
shadow at noon on the longest day in Alexandria and then
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
calculating the distance to Assuan, where there was no
shadow at all. In his work on chronology (now lost) he
gave a list of Theban kings, selected from the various
dynasties, like the lists of Karnak or Abydos. This has
been preserved, along with an attempt to translate the
meaning of the names. The translations, however, are
erroneous, as they are made from the Greek forms of the
names compared with words then current in the decaying
Egyptian of the day.
</p>

<p>
(12) Ptolemy of Megalopolis, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 200. Wrote a history
of Ptolemy Philopator, now lost.
</p>

<p>
(13) Kallixenos of Rhodes, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 210. Wrote a description
of Alexandria in four or more books, now lost.
</p>

<p>
(14) Philistos of Naukratis, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 225. Wrote a description
of Naukratis, a history of Egypt in twelve books,
and an account of Egyptian religion in three books: all
lost.
</p>

<p>
(15) Kharôn of Naukratis, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 160. Wrote on Naukratis
and on the succession of the Ptolemaic priests; the works
are lost.
</p>

<p>
(16) Lykeas of Naukratis, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 160. Wrote an account
of Egypt, now lost.
</p>

<p>
(17) Agatharkhides of Knidos, geographer and historian,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 120. Gave an account of the working of the Egyptian
gold-mines (in his geographical work on the Red Sea) which
has been preserved by Photios.
</p>

<p>
(18) Lysimakhos of Alexandria, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 50. Wrote a
history of Egypt containing the Egyptian legend of the
Hebrew Exodus, which has been preserved by Josephus.
</p>

<p>
(19) L. Cornelius Alexander Polyhistor, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 82-60.
Wrote an account of Egypt in three books; now lost.
</p>

<p>
(20) Diodôros of Sicily (Diodorus Siculus), historian,
travelled in Egypt, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 57, published his great historical
work, called <hi rend='italic'>Bibliothêkê</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 28. The first book of it devoted
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
to Egypt and Ethiopia. Quoted largely from Herodotos,
Hekataios of Abdera, Ephoros and other authors now lost.
We are dependent on him for a connected history of Egypt
during the Persian period.
</p>

<p>
(21) Ptolemy of Mendes, historian, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1. Wrote a
history of Egypt in three (?) books, now lost.
</p>

<p>
(22) Strabo of Amasia, geographer, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 20. Travelled
in Egypt. The last (17th) book of his great work on
geography is devoted to Egypt.
</p>

<p>
(23) Apion of El-Khargeh, grammarian and historian,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 40. Pleaded for the Alexandrines against Philo and
the Jews before Caligula. Wrote a history of Egypt in five
books, the third of which discussed the Hebrew Exodus;
now lost.
</p>

<p>
(24) Khairêmôn of Naukratis, stoic philosopher, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 50.
Was Nero's teacher. Wrote an account of Egypt and an
explanation of the hieroglyphics; now lost.
</p>

<p>
(25) Josephus, son of the Jewish priest Matthias, born
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 37, received his freedom and the name of Flavius, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
69. Quotes from Manetho, Lysimakhos, etc., in his
<hi rend='italic'>Antiquities of the Jews</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Contra Apionem</hi>.
</p>

<p>
(26) Plutarch of Khaironeia, moralist, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 125. Wrote
at Delphi his treatise on Isis and Osiris, which is of great
value for the history of the Osiris-myth.
</p>

<p>
(27) Ptolemy of Alexandria, geographer, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 160.
Egypt is thoroughly and scientifically treated in his great
work on geography.
</p>

<p>
(28) St. Clement of Alexandria, head of the Alexandrine
(Christian) School, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 191-220. Many references to
Egyptian history and religion in his <hi rend='italic'>Strômateis</hi>. He divides
Egyptian writing into hieroglyphic, hieratic and epistolographic
(or demotic), the first being further divided into
alphabetic and symbolic, and the symbolic characters into
imitative, figurative and rebus-like.
</p>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<p>
(29) Julius Africanus, Christian apologist, wrote in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
221 his <hi rend='italic'>Chronology</hi>, in five books; now lost.
</p>

<p>
(30) Porphyry of Batanea, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 233-305, wrote a history
of the Ptolemies; now lost.
</p>

<p>
(31) Eusebios, bishop of Cæsarea, published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 326
his <hi rend='italic'>Chronicle</hi>, containing a list of Manetho's dynasties. The
work has been preserved in an Armenian translation.
</p>

<p>
(32) Horapollo of Nilopolis, grammarian, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 390, wrote
a work on the hieroglyphics in Coptic, which was translated
into Greek by Philippos. Only the ideographic values of
the characters are given, but they are mostly correct.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix IV. Archæological Excursions In The Delta.</head>

<p>
(1) Tel el-Yehudîyeh or Onion.&mdash;Take the train from
Cairo at 10 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi>, reaching Shibîn el-Qanâter at 12.25.
Leave Shibîn el-Qanâter at 5.57 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>, reaching Cairo at
6.50. Donkeys can be procured at Shibîn, but it is a
pleasant walk of a mile and a half through the fields
(towards the south-east) to the Tel. There is a <foreign rend='italic'>café</foreign> at
Shibîn adjoining the station, but it is advisable to take lunch
from Cairo.
</p>

<p>
(2) Kôm el-Atrib or Athribis.&mdash;The mounds lie close to
the station of Benha el-´Asal, north-east of the town, and
can easily be explored between two trains. All trains
between Cairo and Alexandria stop at Benha.
</p>

<p>
(3) Naukratis.&mdash;The mounds of Naukratis (Kôm Qa´if)
lie nearly five miles due west of the station of Teh el-Barûd
on the line between Cairo and Alexandria, where all trains
stop except the express. The first half of the walk is along
a good road under an avenue of trees, but after a village is
reached it leads through fields. Donkeys are not always
to be had at Teh el-Barûd. The low mounds west of the
station are not earlier than the Roman period.
</p>

<p>
(4) Kanôpos or Aboukir.&mdash;A train leaves the Ramleh
station at Alexandria at 7.40 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi>, and reaches Aboukir
at 10.42 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi>, returning from Aboukir at 4.42 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi> It is a
short walk northwards from the station to the temple of
Zephyrion discovered by Daninos Pasha in 1891. Then
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
walk eastward along the shore, where the rocks have been
cut into baths and numerous relics of antiquity lie half-covered
by the waves.
</p>

<p>
(5) The Monument of Darius, near Suez.&mdash;A ride of
rather more than five miles through the desert north of
Suez along the line of the Freshwater Canal brings us to the
fragments of one of the granite stelæ erected by Darius to
commemorate his re-opening of the Canal between the Red
Sea and the Nile. Traces of the cuneiform and hieroglyphic
inscriptions can still be detected upon some of
them. The stelæ were erected at certain intervals along
the line of the Canal, and the remains of three others of
them have been found, on a mound one kilometre south of
Tel el-Maskhûtah or Pithom, a little to the east of the
station of the Serapeum on the Suez Canal, and on the side
of a mound between the 61st kilometre of the Canal and
the telegraphic station of Kabret. From Ismailîyeh to Tel
el-Maskhûtah is a ride across the desert of eleven miles.
</p>

<p>
(6) Tanis or Zoan.&mdash;The easiest way of visiting Tanis
or Sân is to sleep at Mansûrah, where there is a very
tolerable hotel, and go by the morning train (at 9.15) to
the station of Abu ´l-Shekûk, arriving there at 10.55 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi>
One of the small dahabiyehs which ply on the Mo'izz
canal, which passes the station and runs to Sân, should
have been previously engaged, and a servant sent with
food the day before from Mansûrah to get it ready. It is
advisable also to send cantine and bedding. A few hours
(8 to 10) will take the traveller to Sân, where he can remain
as long as he wishes. There is sufficient water in the canal
all the year round to float the dahabiyeh. On the way to
Abu ´l-Shekûk the station of Baqlîyeh is passed (at 9.41 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi>),
close to which (to the east) is Tel el-Baqlîyeh or Hermopolis
Parva. The twin mounds of Tmei el-Amdîd (Mendes
and Thmuis) are not far to the east of the station of
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
Simbellauên, which is reached at 10.11 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi> (or by the 6.45
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi> train from Mansûrah at 7.30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi>). Donkeys should be
telegraphed for beforehand. The great monolithic granite
shrine of Amasis still stands on the mounds. Tel en-Nebêsheh
is only eight miles south-east of Sân.
</p>

<p>
(7) Horbêt or Pharbaithos.&mdash;Leaving Mansûrah at 9.15
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi>, the train reaches Abu-Kebir at 11.55, where donkeys
can be easily procured. It is a pleasant ride of three
miles through the fields to Horbeit and the gigantic monoliths
of Nektanebo. The train leaves Abu-Kebir for
Zagazig and Cairo at 4 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>, reaching Zagazig at 4.32 and
Cairo at 6.50 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(8) Behbit (Egyptian Hebit, Roman Iseum).&mdash;The
granite ruins of the temple of Isis, built by Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>,
lie eight miles by river north of Mansûrah, and are less
than half-an-hour's walk from the eastern bank of the river.
Delicate bas-reliefs have been carved on the granite blocks.
The ruins are a favourite object of picnic parties from
Mansûrah.
</p>

<p>
(9) Bubastis or Tel Bast.&mdash;The ruins of the ancient city
are a few minutes' walk from the railway station and can
be visited between two trains. The site of the temple is
in the middle of the mounds, the ruins of the old houses
rising up on all sides of it. There is a poor hotel in
Zagazig, kept by a Greek.
</p>

<p>
(10) Sais or Sâ el-Hagar.&mdash;This has become difficult
of access since the construction of the railway from
Alexandria to Cairo. The nearest railway station is Kafr
ez-Zaiyât, from which it is distant (by donkey) about
five hours. The voyage by river involves the passage of
several bridges.
</p>

<p>
(11) Tel ed-Deffeneh.&mdash;Tents and camels are necessary,
as well as drinking water, for that of the canal and Lake
Menzaleh is brackish. Either go by train to Salahîyeh
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
(leaving Cairo at 5 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>, arriving at 9.35 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>), or, better, sleep
at Ismailîyeh, and go thence by tramway to Kantara. The
distance across the desert to Tel ed-Deffeneh from Salahîyeh
and Kantara is about the same (eleven miles), but donkeys
are more easily procurable at Kantara than camels. At
Kantara (on the east side of the canal) are monuments and
a <foreign rend='italic'>Tel</foreign> (perhaps that of Zaru). The excursion may be combined
with one to Pelusium, passing Tel el-Hir on the way.
From Kantara to Pelusium is rather more than half-a-day's
journey. Encamp at the edge of the sand-dunes, one-and-a-half
miles from the mounds of Pelusium, walking to them
over the mud, which sometimes will not bear the weight
of a camel. No fresh water is procurable there.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>A</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>abrêk</foreign>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ab-sha, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abshadi, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abu, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abukîr, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abu-Simbel, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abusir, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abutig, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abydos, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achæans, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adapa or Adama, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Æginetans, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africanus, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ah-hotep, Queen, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annas el-Medîneh, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aigyptos, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akhæmenes, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akhillas, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akhilleus, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander Ægos, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander's Tomb, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandria, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Am, Am-pehu, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amasis (Ahmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>), <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ameni, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> (Khu-n-Aten), <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amon, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amon-em-hat <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281-3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amorites, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amyrtæos, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anaxagoras, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antiochus, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthylla, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anysis, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apis, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apopi, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Apries'/>
<l>Apries, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabian nome, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabians, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arad, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aram-Naharaim (Mitanni), <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arioch, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armais (Hor-m-hib), <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arisu, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arkhandropolis, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arsaphes (Her-shef), <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arvad, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashdod, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashkelon, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashmunên, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashtoreth, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asshurim, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assur-bani-pal, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyria, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asykhis or Sasykhis, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atarbekhis, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aten (-Ra), <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athêna, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenians, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athribis, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aupet, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avaris, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<lg>
<l>B</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baba, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonians, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagnold, Major, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bah, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahr Yûsuf, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bashan, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bast, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bata, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benha, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beni-Hassan, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berenikê, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bes, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biahmu, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bigeh, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blemmyes, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bokkhoris, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of the Dead, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bouriant, M., <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brugsch, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bubastis, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Busiris, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butô, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>C</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cæsar, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cæsarion, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cairo, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canaan, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; libraries in, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>camel, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>canal, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carchemish, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canopus, Decree of, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>cats, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cilicia, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Champollion, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>circumnavigation of Africa, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleopatra, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>colossus at Memphis, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>colossi of Fayyûm, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coptos, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coptic alphabet, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>cuneiform, <ref target='Pg060'>60-65</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tablets, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprian potters, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>D</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dahabiyeh voyage, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dakkeh, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dahshûr, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damanhur, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danaans, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daninos Pasha, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daphnæ, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead Sea, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Debod, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Cara, Dr., <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Morgan, Mr., <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demetrius Phalereus, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denderah, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dêr Abu Hannes, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diocletian, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diodoros, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diospolis (Thebes), <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>dreams, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dudu, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebed-Asherah, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebed-tob, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecclesiasticus, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edom, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101-103</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, etymology of, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ekhmîm, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elbo, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleazar, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elephantinê, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>El-Hibeh, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>El-Kab, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>El-Khargeh, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>

<lg>
<l>Eltekeh, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enna, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enoch, book of, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erman, Professor, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esar-haddon, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esneh, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethiopians, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebius, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exodus, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezer, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>F</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fayyûm, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>famines, <ref target='Pg034'>34-38</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fenkhu, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>G</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardner, Mr. E., <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaza, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gebal (Byblos), <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gebel Abu Foda, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gebelên, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gezer, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goshen, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golénischeff, M., <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grant-Bey, Dr., <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greeks, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Griffith, Mr., <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gyges, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>H</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadashah, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamath, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hammamât, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanes (Ahnas), <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hapi (Nile), <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hathor, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>hawks, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebron, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hekatæos, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helen, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliopolis, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hellanikos, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hellenion, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>helmet, bronze, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hephæstion, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herakleopolis (Ahnas), <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270-271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermes, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermopolis, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Her-shef (Arsaphes), <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hezekiah, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierakon, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hininsu (Ahnas), <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>hippopotamus, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hittites, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homer, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hont-mâ-Ra, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hophra, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Apries'>Apries</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hor-m-hib, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horus, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howâra, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huseyn, feast of, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyksos, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hypatia, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iannas, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ibises, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illahun, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inaros, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>inundation, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ionians, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Istar, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>J</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jaddua, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<lg>
<l>Jason, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerahmeel, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeroboam, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joseph, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Josiah, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judah, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>K</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kadesh, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kambyses, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ka-meri-Ra, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kanôpos, <ref target='Pg207'>207-209</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kanôpic arm of Nile, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karians, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kafr el-Ayyât, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kellogg, Dr., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kerkasoros, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khabiri, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khabbash, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khal, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khaf-Ra (Khephren), <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kheb, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khemmis, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kheops (Khufu), <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khephren (Khaf-Ra), <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kheti-ti, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khian (Iannas), <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khita-sir, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khiti, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khri-Ahu, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khu-n-Aten (Amenôphis <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>), <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kimon, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirjath-sepher, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kleomenes, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klysma, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kokkê (Cleopatra), <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kom el-Ahmar, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kôm Qa'if, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krophi, <ref target='Pg199'>199-201</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ktêsias, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kyrênê, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>L</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labai, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labyrinth, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leku, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leontopolis, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lepsius, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leto, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libyans, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lisht, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>M</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maccabees, the, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mafkat (Sinai), <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahanaim, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahler, Professor, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maindes, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manasseh, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manetho, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mariette, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mark Antony, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maspero, Professor, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Master-thief, tale of, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maxyes, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medînet Habu, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mêdum, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megabyzos, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megabazus, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megiddo, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melchizedek, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memnon, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memphis, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mendes, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menelaus (the Jew), <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menelaite nome, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menes, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>

<lg>
<l>Meneptah, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menshîyeh (Ptolemais), <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menzaleh, Lake, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menûf, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mer-ka-Ra, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merom, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messianic prophecy, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>mice, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miletus, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milesians, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Min, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitanni (Aram Naharaim), <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mnevis, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moab, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mohar, Travels of a</hi>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moph (Memphis), <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mophi, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mœris, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Museum, the, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mut, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mykerinos (Men-ka-Ra), <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>N</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahum, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>name, change of, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Napata, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naville, Dr., <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naukratis, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neapolis (Qeneh), <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebuchadrezzar, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Necho of Sais, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neferu-Ptah, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neit, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nektanebo <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nikanor, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nikiu, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nile, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sources of, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nineveh, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nitokris, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>No-Amon (Thebes), <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noph (Memphis), <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norden, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nut-Amon, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>On (Heliopolis), <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onias, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onion, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osarsiph, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiris, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osorkon <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ostraka, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osymandyas, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>P</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pausírís, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papias, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paprêmis, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pa-Uaz (Butô), <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peguath, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelusiac arm of Nile, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelusium, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perdikkas, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pergamos, library of, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perseus, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter, Apocalypse of St., <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Gospel of St., <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrie, Professor W. F., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phanês, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phakussa, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<lg>
<l>Pharaoh, meaning of, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharos, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pherôn, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philæ, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philistines, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philotera (Qoseir), <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phut, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>phœnix, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pi-ankhi, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pi-Sopd, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pithom, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polybos, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polykratês, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pompey, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potiphar, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Probus, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prosôpitis, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proteus, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psalms of Solomon, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psammetikhos <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptah, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemais, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemy <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, Lagos, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, Philadelphus, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Physkôn, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Lathyrus, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyramid, the great, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Q</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Qebhu, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Qerti, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Qoseir, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>R</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ra, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raamses (city), <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ra-men-kheper, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg085'>85-90</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ra-nefer, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raphia, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Red Mound, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Retennu, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhampsinitos (Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>), <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodopis, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosetta Stone, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>S</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabako, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sadducees, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sa el-Hagar (Sais), <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saft el-Henneh (Goshen), <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sais, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samaritans, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samians, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sapi-ris, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sappho, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardinians, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sargon, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sasykhis or Asykhis, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satrapies, Assyrian, in Egypt, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satuna, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schumacher, Dr., <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scyths, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>sebah</hi>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sebek, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sebennytic arm of Nile, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sehêl, stela of, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sekhem (Esneh), <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>

<lg>
<l>Sekhet, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semennûd (Sebennytos), <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Send, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senem (Bigeh), <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sennacherib, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Septimius, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Septuagint, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapeum, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapis, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>serpents, winged, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sesetsu (Sesostris), <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sesostris (Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>), <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Set, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sethos, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97-100</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Set-nekht, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shasu (Bedouin), <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shechem, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shed-festival, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shepherd kings, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheri, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shishak, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sib'e (So), <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siculians, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sidon, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simon the Just, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinai, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Singar, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Si-Ptah, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smendes, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snefru, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>So (Sib'e), <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solomon, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solon, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sostratos, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sphinx, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John, J. A., <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strabo, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Succoth, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumerian, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suphah, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutekh, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>T</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahpanhes, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tand-Amon, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanis (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Zoan'>Zoan</ref>), <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tantah, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ta-user, Queen, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teie, Queen, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tel el-Amarna, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tel el-Baqlîyeh, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tel ed-Deffeneh, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tel el-Yehudîyeh, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tel en-Nebêsheh, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tel Fera'in, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tel Mokdam, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thannyras, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thebes, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>This (Girgeh), <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thukydides, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tirhakah, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tnêphakhtos, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tunip, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turah, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turin Papyrus, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tut-ankh-Amon, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Two brothers, Tale of, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyre, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrian camp, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrsenians, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>U</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uaz, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urd-Amon, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ur-mer, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>

<lg>
<l>W</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wadi Tumilât (Goshen), <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiedemann, Professor, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilbour, Mr., <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>X</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xanthos, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Y</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yaud-hamelek, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Z</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zagazig, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zahi, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zakkur, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zaphnath-paaneah, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zemar, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zenodotos, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zephyrion, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zerah, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Zoan'/>
<l>Zoan (Sân, Tanis), <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
